Mennonite Church British Columbia v. Sur-Del Roofing Ltd., [2010] B.C.J. No. 297
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
L.D. Russell J.
Heard: December 7-11, 2009.
Judgment: February 23, 2010.
Docket: No. S-054949
Registry: Vancouver
[2010] B.C.J. No. 297   |      |      |      |
Between Mennonite Church British Columbia, Plaintiff, and Sur-Del Roofing Limited, Daniel Gerald Fisher dba Sur-Del Roofing Limited, ABC Ltd. and John Doe, Defendants
(144 paras.)
Case Summary
Construction law — Liability — Of contractors and subcontractors — Duties — Duty to owner — Grounds — Negligence — Claim by plaintiff for damage sustained to an Abbotsford B.C. church caused by a Dec. 11, 2004 fire allowed — The plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "total">$2.3 million</damage> for negligence plus costs and interest — The defendant was negligent in performing torch-on-work in the dark on a roofing project and in failing to protect the combustible materials — The evidence, both direct and circumstantial, permitted the inference that the worker Hutchings' negligence caused the fire by allowing the torch to ignite a smouldering fire — There was no evidence to rebut the plaintiff's prima facie case on a balance of probabilities.
Tort law — Negligence — Duty and standard of care — Standard of care — Dangerous things and situations — Fire — Claim by plaintiff for damage sustained to an Abbotsford B.C. church caused by a Dec. 11, 2004 fire allowed — The plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "total">$2.3 million</damage> for negligence plus costs and interest — The defendant was negligent in performing torch-on-work in the dark on a roofing project and in failing to protect the combustible materials — The evidence, both direct and circumstantial, permitted the inference that the worker Hutchings' negligence caused the fire by allowing the torch to ignite a smouldering fire — There was no evidence to rebut the plaintiff's prima facie case on a balance of probabilities.
Claim by plaintiff for <damage type = "total">$2.3 million</damage> for damage to an Abbotsford, B.C., church caused by a Dec. 11, 2004 fire. Earlier that day, the defendant Sur-Del Roofing Ltd., through its subcontractors, had begun installing a new roofing system on the flat sections of the church roof. A propane torch was used to adhere the first layer of the new roofing system to the surface of portions of the flat sections of the church roof. The issues were: (1) whether the defendant was negligent in its performance of roofing operations at the church; and (2) whether the defendant breached its contract to perform its work in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the prevailing standards for the repair and maintenance of roofs at the time of the fire. Damages were agreed at $2,300,000 excluding costs. 

HELD: Claim allowed; plaintiff awarded <damage type = "total">$2.
3 million</damage> in damages for negligence, plus costs and interest. The torch work on the roof stopped at roughly 6:00 p.m. and it was more likely than not that Hutchings was working in the dark without floodlights from shortly after sunset at 4:14 p.m. to approximately 6:00. Hutchings did not do even a one-hour fire watch, as he was home in Langley by 7:00 p.m. following a one-hour commute. The court accepted the evidence of Reed, an expert in issues of fire protection and the cause and origin of fires, that the origin of the fire corresponded with the area in which the roofing operations were being conducted, and that a mechanism was present by virtue of the roofing operation to readily ignite combustibles. The workers did not use a fibreglass basesheet and the absence of the fire protection basesheet was a significant factor in allowing the heat from the torch to penetrate the gap at the interface between the flat roof and the gable roof. It was not disputed the defendant owed the plaintiff a duty of care. The claim of negligence failed with respect to the failure to carry out a fire watch, however, as even a four-hour fire watch would not have detected the fire. The defendant was negligent in performing torch-on-work in the dark and in failing to protect the combustible materials. The standard in the B.C. Fire Code was that all combustible materials within 15 metres of the location in which hot work operations were being conducted were required to be protected against ignition by removing the material, shielding the material using a non-combustible shielding, or thoroughly wetting the area. Absent the use of any fireproofing material on the roof or any steps taken to protect the combustible materials, the defendant breached the required standard of care. The evidence, both direct and circumstantial, permitted the inference that Hutchings' negligence caused the fire by allowing the torch to ignite a smouldering fire. There was no evidence to rebut the plaintiff's prima facie case on a balance of probabilities.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
British Columbia Fire Code, B.C. Reg. 285/98, s. 5.2.3
Court Order Interest Act, RSBC 1996, CHAPTER 79,
Counsel
Counsel for Plaintiff: J.M.S. Woolley.
Counsel for Defendants: J.P. Scouten, M. Vis-Dunbar.
Reasons for Judgment
L.D. RUSSELL J.
Introduction
1  On the evening of December 11, 2004, there was a fire at the Mennonite Church (the "Church") located at 2360 Langdon Street, Abbotsford, BC.
2  Earlier that day, Sur-Del Roofing Ltd. ("Sur-Del"), through its sub-contractors, had begun installing a 2-Ply Torch flex SBS Modified Roofing System on the flat sections of the roof of the Church.
3  Sur-Del used a propane torch to adhere the first layer of the new roofing system to the surface of portions of the flat sections of the roof of the Church.
4  Sunset on December 11, 2004 occurred at 4:14 p.m.
5  The Church had an alarm system but no sprinkler system.
6  An alarm went off in the Church at around 10 p.m. The fire commander arrived in the third fire truck to reach the scene at approximately 10:36 p.m.
7  The fire was well-advanced by the time the fire trucks arrived and it caused extensive damage to the Church.
8  The Church was demolished and rebuilt. Damages are agreed at $2,300,000 excluding costs.
9  This trial will deal with liability only.
10  The action against Daniel Gerald Fisher is discontinued without costs.
Issues
11  Was the defendant Sur-Del negligent in the performance of its roofing operations at the Church?
12  Did the defendant Sur-Del breach its contract with the Church to perform its work in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the standards prevailing for the repair and maintenance of roofs at the time of the fire?
Facts
13  The roof of the Church consisted of a flat roof surrounding a gable over the sanctuary. The gable roof was constructed of asphalt shingles over 1/2 inch fibre board on shiplap and 2 inch by 4 inch framing on flat edges. The underside of the roof was finished with 1/2 inch cedar over 1/2 inch gypsum board.
14  The north section of the roof was a flat roof with a torch-on membrane over 1/2 inch plywood sheathing. The flat roof had 2 inch by 12 inch joists and was covered on the underside with 1/2 inch gypsum.
15  Where the flat roof meets the gable roof, there is a gap between the joists of approximately 1 1/2 inches.
16  Both the gable and the flat roof had fibreglass batt insulation.
17  The contract with the Church required Sur-Del to remove the old tar and gravel roof on the flat portion and apply the new roof.
18  To accomplish this, the Sur-Del crew had to tear away a large portion of the flat roof, leaving the plywood base exposed. It was to this base that the new roofing system would be applied using a propane torch.
19  The field propane torches used by the Sur-Del crew are 2 1/2 foot long pipes connected to a propane tank by a length of hose and a regulator. The flame produced at the end of the pipe is approximately one foot long and has a temperature of 1,000 degrees C. or more.
20  The roofing system to be used has two layers, a base layer and a cap, hence its description as a 2-ply system. The base layer is known as 180 smooth and the cap, which of course was never applied, is identified as 250 Cap. However, before the two layers are put down, it is usual practice to use a fireproof membrane. The fireproof base is Number 25 basesheet and it is nailed to the roof at 3 inch intervals before the roofing system is torched onto that basesheet.
21  The point of using Number 25 basesheet is to provide a measure of fire protection.
22  The roofing materials are all manufactured by a company called IKO.
23  After the Church had solicited bids, it reviewed them for the lowest price and then interviewed the principals. A contract was signed with Daniel Fisher, the president of Sur-Del, for a 2-Ply Torch flex SBS Modified Roofing System with a 20-year Warranty for both roofs for the contract price of <damage type = "other">$20,400</damage>, payable on completion. Initially, the Church intended to repair only part of the flat roof and later decided to re-roof two parts of it.
24  Sur-Del costed the price for the job by calculating the price of materials required and the cost of delivery and labour.
25  In the costing analysis prepared by Mr. Fisher (at Exhibit 4, tab 2), the materials listed as required for the "20-year Torchflex System" are as follows:
IKO 25# Basesheet - <damage type = "other">$9.65</damage> per square
IKO Torchflex 180FF Base - <damage type = "other">$37.00</damage> per square
IKO Torchflex 250 Cap Sheet - <damage type = "other">$48.13</damage> per square
Accessories - <damage type = "other">$13.00</damage> per square
26  A square is the unit of measurement used for roofing materials. 100 square feet is one square.
27  Sur-Del placed its order (at Exhibit 4, tab 6) for the job at the Church on December 9, 2004. The order sent to Cedar Grove Roofing Supply Centre for delivery to the Church on December 10, 2004 at 2630 Langdon Street, Abbotsford "Roof-top 8:00 AM" was for:
51 Rolls of IKO 180 smooth
64 Rolls of IKO 250 cap sheet, light grey
7 - 2" plumbing stacks, flat, lead (plastic)
2 - 3" plumbing stack, flat, lead (plastic)
2 - Gooseneck vents
5 - 3" hotweld drains, flat.
28  The stacks, vents and drains are the accessories noted in the order. Under the contract, they were to be replaced.
29  Cedar Grove's invoice (at Exhibit 4, tab 7) indicates the following materials were delivered to 2630 Langdon Street, Abbotsford:
Torchflex IP 180 3.0 mm Base (illegible) (51) <damage type = "other">$34.70</damage> (emphasis added)
Torchflex IP 250 Frostone grey (illegible) (64) <damage type = "other">$36.00</damage> (emphasis added)
2" flat lead (7)
3" flat lead (2)
26 ga gooseneck vent - galvan (illegible) (2)
3" copper drain - Hot weld (5)
30  I infer that the bolded figures above indicate the price per square for the materials.
31  Sur-Del hires subcontractors to perform the roofing job. While Mr. Fisher is an experienced roofer, he does not do the work himself. He did not attend the Church while the roofing work was being done. He did go to the site late on December 11, 2004 after he was informed of the fire in progress.
The Witnesses
Edmund Giesbrecht
32  Mr. Giesbrecht is a member of the Church and part of the committee which hired Sur-Del. He is a painter by trade and looks after the inside of the Church.
33  He described the Church building as having a steeple over the sanctuary with a lower, flat roof from the front of the building to the back. The flat roof was tar and gravel and had begun to leak into the offices at the back of the building.
34  On December 11, 2004, Mr. Giesbrecht was at the Church around noon. He wanted to check on the roofers and to determine if the room he had reserved for an evening meeting was available.
35  He saw the roofers working. They needed electrical power. The Church was locked so he ran a cord out to the roof.
36  He returned to the Church at 5:30 p.m. to set up for his evening meeting. He is the chair of the new group he was meeting with at 7:00 p.m.
37  It was a clear cold night and it was getting dark as he drove towards the Church. He could see the flare of the propane torch as he came down the hill on Langdon Street about 200 feet away. There were no floodlights in use on the roof.
38  Mr. Giesbrecht is certain there was torching going on as he approached the Church. He entered the Church on the west side of the building to avoid setting off the alarm. It took him a half hour to set up his meeting. When he came outside, he went to the back of the Church, the north side, to see if the roofers still required the use of the extension cord. The crew member on the ground said they no longer needed the cord so he unplugged it and pulled it in through the mailbox.
39  He believes there was one person using the torch at 6:00 p.m. because he could hear the hiss of the torch as it was being used. He referred to hearing the noise of "pulling the flame". However, he was never on the roof during this operation, has never been in the roofing trade and he could not see the torch in use from the ground.
40  The meeting went on for an hour and refreshments for a half hour after that. At 8:35 p.m. he left the Church after having checked every door and setting the alarm.
41  When he walked through the Church to lock up and set the alarm, he did not smell smoke.
42  He did not see anyone on the roof as he drove off.
43  The alarm company called Mr. Giesbrecht just after 10:00 p.m. He drove up to the Church to check and when he was just a few minutes away, he saw smoke coming out of the back of the building. He met the police at the northeast side of the building (the back) but the fire was too advanced to get the Church doors opened.
44  Mr. Giesbrecht knew there had been a second fire in the boarded-up church two weeks after the first fire. He had no knowledge of the circumstances of that fire or the extent of the additional damage it caused.
Keith Forrest
45  Mr. Forrest is a retired gentleman who lives with his wife in a house across the street from the Church. He has never been a member of the Church.
46  Mr. Forrest's house is directly across the street from the Church. The north end of his house borders up to the south end of the Church entrance. His house is located to the west of the Church. Exhibit 3, tab 2, photo 2 indicates reasonably well what he can see across the street from his house.
47  He sees the gable and the shingle section on the north side of the Church and has a good view of the church because his house is on a built-up lot which is higher than the Church.
48  On December 11, 2004 he heard the roofers when he got up at 7:45 a.m. He saw them working for that day until after dark and observed the torch being used off and on for the entire day. He said it got dark about 4:30 to 4:45 p.m. He was home most of the day putting up his Christmas lights. He finished that task about 3:00 p.m.
49  Mr. Forrest testified that he saw the torch being used until about 6:00 p.m. by just one or two workers with the aid of an electric light but not a floodlight. It became quiet after 6:00 p.m.
Captain Darrel Slack
50  Captain Slack has been with the Abbotsford Fire Rescue for 24 years. He was in command of the fire at the Church on December 11, 2004.
51  On arrival at the fire scene, he saw 40 to 60 foot high flames coming out of the north end of the Church. The fire appeared to be venting, had burnt through the structure and was coming out on the north end where the flat roof met the gable. He noticed work had been taking place on the roof and saw roofing material and appliances.
52  It was Captain Slack's observation that the fire was concentrated in the sanctuary below the roof and into the wall where the flat roof met the gable.
Chris Reed
53  Mr. Reed testified and was qualified as an expert in issues of fire protection and the cause and origin of fires. His report was admitted as Exhibit 7 (the "Report").
54  The thrust of Mr. Reed's Report is that the origin of the fire was most likely at the interface of the gable and flat roof at the northwest corner of the gable where the application of the membrane ended.
55  At page 9, figure 9 of the Report, there is a picture of the northwest flat roof section on which the membrane had been applied to a point where there is a small piece of plywood and beyond that, bare plywood to which the membrane would have been torched on the following day, but for the fire. The bare plywood area is approximately 3 metres from the east edge of the flat roof. The membrane had been applied to that point and intersects the base of the gable roof. To the right in the picture is a plywood wall put up following the fire. Figure 10 is a photograph taken behind the plywood wall which shows the bottom portion of the burned through gable roof where it meets the flat roof.
56  Mr. Reed took these photographs.
57  Mr. Reed stated that the photograph at page 8 of his Report demonstrates a "V" demarcation typical of a truncated cone pattern caused by a plume of smoke and heat burning upwards into the roof space from a flat surface. At the point of the "V" is the area of greatest char and damage. Damage decreases as it moves away and this is consistent with the point of origin of the fire. This burned-through portion of the roof is the gable roof over the northwest corner of the sanctuary and corresponds on the outside with the point where the applied roof membrane meets that corner and stops.
58  Figure 11 at page 10 is a photograph of what Mr. Reed postulates is the area of origin, the intersection of the flat and gable roof. He states that this photograph shows the dominant burn damage to the sanctuary roof, the "V" demarcation originating from the three laminate beams which originate at the northwest corner of the gable end where the roof membrane stops at the interface with the gable and the extent of the burn damage to those beams and surrounding framing, all of which is only consistent with the fire developing at the roof intersection and burning within the concealed roof cavities.
59  He went on to state in his report that there were only two potential mechanisms which correlate with possible fire development at this location: electrical failure or roofing operations.
60  Mr. Reed examined the possibility of electrical failure and although he agreed on vigorous cross-examination that he could not absolutely rule out the possibility of an electrical fire, he was satisfied the damage he saw to electrical conductors and wiring was consistent with published data on fire exposure rather than fire causation. He was able to trace fire-damaged electrical circuits back to where there was no damage. Since the insulation on the wires outside the area of the fire was intact, it was unlikely there was any overheating in the circuit. This would militate against an electrical fire.
61  As well, there were no junction boxes in the area of the hottest fire so there was nothing other than the fire itself which could cause an electrical arc.
62  Mr. Reed was also put through his paces with respect to the effect of the roof membrane being tucked up under the shingles. His figure 12 was demonstrated to be schematic only. He agreed it was not accurate as to scale. Nor was it an accurate representation of the way in which the flat roof intersects with the gable.
63  In fact, there is no sudden transition, and no lip from the flat roof to the gable. Rather, it slants upwards at the interface and the shingles only begin about 8 inches above the 1 1/2 inch gap between the flat surface and the pitch of the roof.
64  Not much turns on this except that the diagram was prepared some time after Mr. Reed had visited the fire site.
65  Mr. Reed agreed with counsel for Sur-Del that the membrane itself is non-combustible although this does not mean it cannot be consumed by fire. In essence the non-combustible nature of the membrane would mean that the hot work performed on the roof would not require a fire watch after the roof was covered and so Sur-Del would not have violated the BC Fire Code even if no fire watch had been conducted at the end of the work day.
66  Notwithstanding the careful cross-examination of Mr. Reed and his concession that the possibility of an electrically-caused fire could not be absolutely ruled out, I find his conclusion compelling that direct flame impingement during the roofing process on the wood framing or fibreboard surface could cause an incipient or smouldering fire.
67  At page 14 of the Report, he concludes:
The point of origin of the fire was located directly below the area that a propane torch would have been used to seal the edge to the corner of the roof. There were no other sources of ignition in the area of origin and the witness observations of fire within 240 minutes of the work being done is consistent with laboratory testing of smouldering to flaming transition times.
The origin of the fire corresponds with the area in which the roofing operations were being conducted. A mechanism was present by virtue of the roofing operation to readily ignite combustibles. The use of the torch in the northwest corner of the roof bordering the sanctuary gable roof, the fire damage at this location, the temperatures produced by LP gas flames, and the propensity for fibreboard or other readily combustible material to initiate smouldering combustion are consistent with this fire occurring as a result of the roofing operation.
68  I accept those findings. I note that the defendant did not call an expert to rebut this report but sought only to raise alternative theories of fire causation.
Chris Hutchings
69  Chris Hutchings was the leader of the subcontracted crew of four hired to do the roofing at the Church.
70  Mr. Hutchings testified that he usually provides his own tools but had to borrow Sur-Del's tools to do the torch-on job. He did not give evidence of providing any goods or materials for the roofing job at the Church.
71  Chris Hutchings had a wide range of roofing experience but only one year's experience with torch-on roofing which he had acquired while working with Daniel Fisher.
72  Mr. Hutchings described the process he used to work on the Church. He arrived with his crew at between 7:00 and 8:00 a.m. and proceeded to clear off the tar and gravel. It came up easily without the need for the roof cutter.
73  Once the tar and gravel had been removed and placed in bins, the bare plywood on the flat roof was exposed. At that point, Mr. Hutchings described placing the fire protection basesheet on the roof and nailing it into the plywood at 6 inch intervals with a 3 inch overlap. He explained that the use of the fire protection leaves no place for flame, presumably from the torch, to enter the roof.
74  The fire protection basesheet was nailed into place, 6 rolls in front, as he torched on the 180 smooth.
75  Mr. Hutchings also explained that a fire is not an acceptable outcome following the application of a torch-on roof and it is part of his job to make sure there is no fire.
76  Towards the end of the day, Mr. Hutchings worked on the area where the gable roof met the flat roof. He testified that he knew there were combustible materials in this area such as framing, building paper and fibreboard but he was also aware he could protect these combustible materials by covering them up with non-combustible materials. He did state that there was no fibreboard in the gable.
77  Mr. Hutchings was also aware that the 1 1/2 inch gap between the flat roof and the gable was an area of concern. It ran the length of the roof and only the old tar and gravel protected it from leaks. He stated he put fire protection over this gap although he did not seal the corners.
78  The technique he described to cover the intersection between the gable and the flat roof was to remove the nails from the first row of shingles and to slide the fire protection basesheet 6 to 8 inches under the first row of shingles. Then he would do a temporary tuck of the 180 smooth over the fire protection. The fire protection basesheet would be tucked permanently while the 180 smooth was only a temporary placement (a loose lay) to protect for overnight water leaks until the stripping (application of narrower strips of 180 smooth) around the edge of the roof could be done the next day. The 180 smooth would be pulled out, the strip torched on and finally, the cap would be applied and stripped adjacent to the gable.
79  The cap was never applied due to the fire.
80  To explain the use of the torch, Mr. Hutchings described how he would hook the roll of membrane material with the cane, stand on the edge of the roll and lift up the material with the cane. He would then put heat on the roof with the torch and on the edge of the membrane. It is the heat from the torch which melts the membrane and prepares the roof, not the flame itself.
81  Mr. Hutchings stated he would stand on the loose lay, curl up the edge and hold the flame away so that the flame was about four to five feet away from the shingles and from himself.
82  The intersection of the gable and the flat roof was the last part of the roof he torched on that day.
83  It is Mr. Hutchings' opinion that there was no fibreboard in the gable. He saw only plywood and explained the lack of fibreboard by saying that fibreboard would not be used on a pitched roof because it is too spongey.
84  Mr. Hutchings testified that he worked at torching until 3:30 to 4:00 p.m. He stated he knew that rain was coming and he would have to tarp the bare plywood by draping it from the gable. This operation took 45 minutes to an hour.
85  The fire watch began as soon as the torches were turned off, according to Mr. Hutchings. He checked for hot spots with his bare hands on areas where he had last torched. He was able to do this because the day was cold and the torch on membrane had cooled.
86  Mr. Hutchings then cleaned up the tools and waited another 45 minutes to an hour and went back onto the roof to check for the last time. He saw no smoke and felt no fire heat. In his view, the roof had cooled down and it was safe for him to leave. He believes he left for home about 6:00 p.m.
87  He stated he turned off the torches while there was still daylight. By the time he had finished tarping, it was dark and he was sitting in the truck waiting. When he went up on the roof the last time, he did not have a light with him because he wanted to be sure he could see the glow if a fire had started. He did not need lights for the earlier fire check because there were street lights and a light above the gable.
88  In cross-examination, Mr. Hutchings indicated that he and his crew had done about one-third of the roof on December 11. He agreed that he was trying to get as much done as possible. There had been occasions when he had had to work in the dark. However, he stated he would not do torch-on in the dark because it was impossible to see the seams. The material is black and it is necessary to line up the seams and have a 3-inch overlap. He agreed that floodlights were necessary for night work with torches and he did not have any at the job at the Church.
89  Even in the dark, with the help of ambient light from streetlights, Mr. Hutchings said he would have been able to see smoke had there been a fire. His fire watch lasted from around 4:00 p.m. until he left at 6:00 p.m., and during that time he felt for fire, looked for it and smelled for smoke. His last fire watch was in the dark.
Daniel Fisher
90  Mr. Fisher went to the Church to see the roof, give a quote and secure the roofing job. Once he got the contract, he did not return to the Church until he was called to the fire. He also went to the Church the day after the fire.
91  His wife ordered the materials for the roofing job from Cedar Grove Roofing Supply.
92  When he went to see the Church roof to give his quote, he saw the tar and gravel flat roof and the shingled gable roof. Below the place the shingles began, it was his observation that a rolled roof product had been used with tar paper down to where the tar and gravel roof butted up to the sloped gable roof.
93  Mr. Fisher explained that the joint between the two roofs would have been done by mopping the rolled roof into the tar and gravel. This technique would keep the tar paper up where it was needed and seals it to the tar and gravel. Above the tar paper was where the shingles began, a distance of 18 inches from the joint. The tar and gravel could not have been used up the slope of the gable roof because the hot tar would run.
94  The shingles were a high-quality non-flammable shingle which can be seen virtually intact following the fire.
95  Mr. Fisher takes no part in the installation of roofs except to make an inspection before the finishing material, the cap, is torched on.
96  If there are any issues with the job, the foreman will call. Mr. Fisher did not receive a call about this project.
97  Making a roof watertight overnight is an important step in roofing. At the end of the day the crew will check the seams of the membrane, cover the roofing materials to be used the next day with a tarp, and tarp the areas where temporary water protection cannot be used.
98  When approaching a different grade of roof, it is not possible to pull up a whole roll of membrane because a bond onto the grade cannot be obtained. In such an area, smaller sections of roofing membrane are torched on to get a better and more watertight seal. The use of loose lay as temporary water protection is common.
99  The fire watch Mr. Fisher has taught Mr. Hutchings to use, is a mandatory 1-hour fire watch but he requires a 2-hour fire watch while cleaning up and then a return to the roof to check after clean-up is completed.
100  He described instructing a check for smoke, and using smell and touch. In particular, areas with openings are problem areas, such as those encountered at a change of grade on a roof. It is Mr. Fisher's practice to wait enough time following completion of a day's work for everything to cool down.
101  In cross-examination, Mr. Fisher stated that the order faxed to Cedar Grove, the only supplier Sur-Del uses, listed some of the materials used for the Church roof.
102  He agreed that the fibreglass basesheet was not on the order but suggested it must have come with the roofing crew.
103  I note that Mr. Hutchings was the only member of the roofing crew who testified and he did not mention bringing the fibreglass basesheet with him to the job. As well, the materials for the roofing job were lifted on to the roof by the crane truck from Cedar Grove the day before the job commenced. How Mr. Hutchings and his crew could carry a substantial number of rolls of basesheet up to the roof was not explained.
104  Mr. Fisher agreed that the fibreglass basesheet was a component of the torch-on roof but said that it would work without the basesheet. However, he insisted that the basesheet was used.
105  Since there was only one delivery to the roof site from Cedar Grove, and there was no fibreglass basesheet on the packing slip from Cedar Grove, it appears to me no fibreglass basesheet was delivered to the Church.
106  If the fibreglass basesheet was not delivered to the Church, and there is no evidence of it being at the job site through any other mechanism, it was not available for use on the Church roof.
107  Notwithstanding the evidence given by both Mr. Fisher (who was not at the Church while the roofing work was being done) and Mr. Hutchings, it is my view that the fibreglass basesheet, the fire protection, was not applied on the Church roof.
108  Mr. Fisher attempted to point to fibrous material in Exhibit 14, photograph 4 to show that the basesheet was used. However, it is my understanding that the 180 smooth membrane applied to the roof contains a textile: "A tough non-woven polyester reinforcing mat ..." (Exhibit 4, tab 9, p. 3 Torchflex TP-180-FF-Base).
109  Mr. Fisher's credibility suffered somewhat on other topics on which he was questioned. Exhibit 13 is a letter prepared by Ms. Robert, Mr. Fisher's wife, at his instruction and based on information he provided to her. In it, she states that the roofers were finished at 4:30 p.m. However, on his examination for discovery, page 188, question 1234, he states he received a call from Mr. Hutchings (a change in his evidence in direct) at "2 -something, before 3 o-clock" to say he was wrapping up and that the torching was finished at 3 pm. He attempted to explain this discrepancy by saying that he is dyslexic and has trouble with time lines. He also indicated that the difference between 2:30 p.m. (wrap-up time) and 4:30 p.m. is not a big deal to him.
110  I note, as well, that at page 185, question 1212, Mr. Fisher stated they were done by 2:00 p.m. but did not get out of there until 4:00 or 5:00 p.m. They were doing preparation setting up for the next day and doing fire watches.
111  However, if the time the roofers finished torching were to be one of the determining factors in deciding liability, it would be advantageous for Mr. Fisher if the roofing crew wrapped up the torching earlier, because if the fire had not shown up by 8:30 p.m .when Mr. Giesbrecht left the Church, the fire could not have been caused by an incipient or smouldering fire resulting from the roofing operations since the lab data included in Mr. Reed's Report suggests that 240 minutes is the longest period of time which can elapse before a smouldering fire erupts into flame.
112  In discussing the fire watch, in cross examination Mr. Fisher stated there is no need for the person charged with the fire watch to be on the roof for the entire two hours. On examination for discovery, at page 184, question 1204, he stated the person would be on the roof for the whole two hours.
113  In cross-examination, he stated that floodlights would only be useful if a fire watch were being conducted after dark in poor conditions.
114  On his examination for discovery, at page 184, questions 1207 -1210, he stated that if a fire watch were being done after dark, floodlights should be brought in.
115  In all the above cases, Mr. Fisher agreed that he had given the answers at discovery and that the answers were true.
116  Mr. Fisher also agreed that to do torching at night, floodlights are required because while you can see the torch, you cannot see the product. He commented that without a floodlight "you could leave something open and have a leak".
117  I infer from Mr. Fisher's comment that if torching went on after dark without floodlights, it would be possible to inadvertently torch an area like a corner or a gap without realizing the torch had strayed into an unprotected area. In the absence of fire protection, it would be possible when putting down the loose lay and heating the edge to form the temporary bond, to allow the torch to stray into the gap, an area which Mr. Fisher stated would be of particular concern.
Conclusions on the Evidence
118  I prefer the evidence of Mr. Giesbrecht and Mr. Forrest about the time at which the torching ceased on the Church roof. Mr. Forrest, in particular, is not now, nor has he ever been, a member of the Church. He has nothing to gain through giving evidence. I also found Mr. Giesbrecht to be a careful and honest witness.
119  I find that the torch work on the roof stopped at approximately 6:00 p.m. and that it is more likely than not that Mr. Hutchings was working in the dark without floodlights from shortly after sunset at 4:14 p.m. on December 11, 2004 to approximately 6:00 p.m.
120  Since I do not accept Mr. Hutchings' evidence that he stopped torching at between 3:30 and 4:00 p.m., and Mr. Fisher was not there to be able to support that assertion, I find that Mr. Hutchings did not do a two-hour fire watch or even a one-hour fire watch since he would have finished work around 6:00 p.m. and was home in Langley by 7:00 p.m. following a commute of approximately one hour.
121  Based on the factors Mr. Reed has set out in his Report and on the observation of Captain Slack at the scene, I find that the northwest corner of the interface between the gable and the flat roof where Mr. Hutchings finished torching that day and placed a loose lay under the shingles, was the place at which the fire originated.
122  I find that the workers did not use a fibreglass basesheet and the absence of the fire protection basesheet was a significant factor in allowing the heat from the torch to penetrate the gap at the interface between the flat roof and the gable roof.
Analysis
Negligence
123  To establish a claim for negligence the plaintiff must satisfy the Court that the defendants owed the plaintiff a duty of care; that the defendant breached that duty of care; and that damages resulted from that breach.
124  It is not disputed that the defendant owed the plaintiff a duty of care and therefore the central issues to be determined are whether the defendant breached the relevant standard of care and if so whether that breach caused the fire.
125  The plaintiff asserts that the defendant was negligent in three respects: performing torch-on roofing work in the dark without the benefit of floodlights when it was unsafe to do so; failing to protect combustible materials in the vicinity of the torch-on work; and failing to carry out a reasonable fire watch after they had completed their work on the roof.
126  With respect to standard of care, the plaintiff submits that the applicable standard of care for a roofer performing torch-on work in British Columbia at that time can be found in the provisions of the 1998 British Columbia Fire Code,  ["Code"]. The plaintiff points to the testimony of Mr. Reed, who was qualified as an expert in fire prevention, who relied on the Code in forming his opinion regarding the appropriate precautions that ought to be taken in applying a torch-on membrane. The Code sets out minimum requirements respecting fire safety. Section 5.2 of the Code concerns "hot works", and applies to "hot works involving open flames or producing heat or sparks, including ... adhesive bonding ...": s. 5.2.1.1.1.
127  The plaintiff submits that the provisions that are relevant to the standard of care in issue in the present matter are found at s. 5.2.3 and provide as follows:
5.2.3 Prevention of Fires
5.2.3.1. Location of Operations
Except as provided in Sentence (2), hot work shall be carried out in an area free of combustible and flammable contents, with walls, ceilings and floors of non-combustible construction or lined with non combustible materials.
When it is not practicable to undertake hot work in an area described in Sentence (1),
combustible and flammable materials within a 15 m distance from the hot work shall be protected against ignition in conformance with Article 5.2.3.2.,
a fire watch shall be provided during the hot work and for a period of not less than 60 min after its completion in conformance with Article 5.2.3.3., and
a final inspection of the hot work area shall be conducted 4 h after completion of work.
...
5.2.3.2. Protection of Combustible and Flammable Materials
Any combustible and flammable material, dust or residue shall be
removed from the area where hot work is carried out, or
protected against ignition by the use of noncombustible materials.
Combustible materials or building surfaces that cannot be removed or protected against ignition as required in Sentence (1) shall be thoroughly wetted where hot work is carried out
...
128  The Code adopted the provisions of the 1995 National Fire Code of Canada, which was accepted as the standard of care in a negligence case against a roofing company that was alleged to have caused a fire: Decoste Manufacturing Ltd. v. A & B Roofing Ltd.,  at para. 27; see also Trans North Turbot Air Ltd. v. North 60 Petro Ltd.,  at para. 232, aff'd  with respect to welding. While the Supreme Court of Canada clearly states that there is no such thing as a tort for breach of a statutory duty: The Queen (Canada) v. Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, , , the Code can be used as evidence of what the standard of care would have been. The use of the Code is supported by the expert evidence of Mr. Reed that the appropriate precautions that ought to be taken are set out in the Code.
129  The defendant asserts that the applicable standard of care should be based on the standard practice of the particular industry, the roofing industry, and that the burden is on the plaintiff to demonstrate either that the defendant fell short of the general industry practice, or that the industry practice itself involves negligence: Webster v. Robinson,  (S.C.); and Hollis v. Birch,  (S.C.). Because the defendants produced no independent or reliable evidence with respect to the appropriate standard of care other than with respect to fire watches, the Court accepts that the standard of care for torch-on roofing work in British Columbia at the time was the 1998 British Columbia Fire Code.
130  The defendant did point to two alternate sources of evidence as to the appropriate standard of care with respect to fire watch requirements: the Manual published by the Roofing Contractors' Association and the standards set by the Workers' Compensation Board of B.C. both specifically in relation to torch-on roofing, and both of which require a one hour fire watch only. The question of which standard applies in this case, however, is not necessary for me to decide. I have already found as a fact that Mr. Hutchings did not do a one-hour fire watch since he was home in Langley by 7:00 p.m. Therefore, even if one hour were to be the applicable standard, Mr. Hutchings would have been in breach. However, it is not likely that the lack of a fire watch was determinative in any event, as the fire alarm did not go off until 10:00 p.m. Therefore, unless I were to find that a four-hour fire watch was the standard prevailing in the roofing industry, which was not determined on the evidence, a fire watch would not have detected the fire. The plaintiff's claim of negligence fails with respect to the defendant's failure to carry out a fire watch.
131  With respect to the plaintiff's other two claims: that the defendant was negligent in performing torch-on work in the dark and in failing to protect the combustible materials, it is my view that Sur-Del was negligent in those respects in the performance of its roofing operations at the Church.
132  The evidence at trial established that the work on the roof stopped at approximately 6:00 p.m. Mr. Forrest stated that it was getting dark at around 4:30 to 4:45 p.m. Because the sun set at 4:14 p.m. on December 11, 2004, work would have been performed in the dark for an hour to an hour and a half. The evidence established that torch-on work was being performed until around 6:00 p.m. It was not disputed that no floodlights were used at the Church. Mr. Fisher testified in his examination for discovery that it is general industry standard to use floodlights if you are performing torch-on work in the dark. The defendant was therefore in breach of the requisite standard of care.
133  Furthermore, I find that the defendant was in breach of the standard set out in the Code that requires that all combustible materials within 15 metres of the location in which hot work operations are being conducted are required to be protected against ignition by removing the material, shielding the material using a non-combustible shielding, or thoroughly wetting the area. The gabled area of the roof was not covered by non-combustible shielding or wetted down when Mr. Hutchings was performing torch-on work in the immediate area. I have also found as a fact that the defendant did not use a fibreglass basesheet, which was the fireproofing material that they claimed to have been using. Absent the use of any fireproofing material on the roof or any steps taken to protect the combustible materials, the defendant breached the standard of care required in the circumstances.
134  Having found the defendant breached the requisite standard of care in two respects, the next question which must be answered is whether either or both of those breaches caused the damage suffered by the Church.
135  The test for causation in negligence is well known, as set out by the Supreme Court of Canada in Resurfice Corp. v. Hanke,  at paras. 18-28, . The general test for causation remains the "but for" test, which requires the plaintiff to demonstrate, on a balance of probabilities, that the damage would not have occurred but for the negligence of the defendant. A substantial connection must exist between the acts of the defendant and the fire.
136  Mr. Reed, who testified as an expert in causes and origins of fires, stated:
Had the combustible fascia, fibreboard, or wood framing at the edge of the membrane been adequately protected in the area in which the hot work operations were being conducted in accordance with the 1998 BCFC, the combustible components would not have been exposed to the flame and therefore the fire would not have occurred.
137  The defendant's argument is that the evidence is insufficient to establish that the fire at the Church was, in fact, caused by the torching activities and not, for example, by an electrical fire. The plaintiff, on the other hand, asserts that there is compelling circumstantial evidence: the defendant had care and control of the plaintiff's roof; the defendant's crew were working with a propane torch in the vicinity of combustible materials; and a roof fire is not something that in the ordinary course occurs under the management of a reasonably careful roofer taking adequate precautions. From this circumstantial evidence, the plaintiff asks this Court to draw an inference of negligence.
138  The New Brunswick Court of Appeal in Sisters of Charity of the Immaculate Conception v. Robert J. Fudge Ltd.  (C.A.), using the language of res ipsa loquitur, found it appropriate to draw an inference of negligence in similar factual circumstances.
139  However, in light of the Supreme Court of Canada's decision in Fontaine v. British Columbia (Official Administrator),  at para. 27, , the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur is to be treated as a common sense approach to circumstantial evidence and is not to be applied in a formalistic way:
[27] It would appear that the law would be better served if the maxim was treated as expired and no longer used as a separate component in negligence actions. After all, it was nothing more than an attempt to deal with circumstantial evidence. That evidence is more sensibly dealt with by the trier of fact, who should weigh the circumstantial evidence with the direct evidence, if any, to determine whether the plaintiff has established on a balance of probabilities a prima facie case of negligence against the defendant. Once the plaintiff has done so, the defendant must present evidence negating that of the plaintiff or necessarily the plaintiff will succeed.
140  It is my view that based on the evidence, both direct and circumstantial, that this Court can draw the inference that Mr. Hutchings' negligence caused the fire by allowing the torch to ignite a smouldering fire, likely in the unprotected gap between the flat and the gable roof. While the defendant has advanced the theory that the possible cause of the fire was electrical, there is no evidence of that to rebut the plaintiff's prima facie case on a balance of probabilities.
Breach of Contract
141  The damages claimed for breach of contract would be duplicative of those claimed for negligence. Having found the defendant negligent and liable for those damages, it is unnecessary for this Court to consider the claim for breach of contract.
142  I would note however, that Mr. Fisher gave evidence that, without the fireproofing, the warranty of the roof through the manufacturer of the roofing material would be void and therefore a breach of contract would arise from the failure to supply the roof that was promised to the Church.
Conclusion
143  Having found that the defendant was negligent and that that negligence caused the fire at the Church, the defendant is liable for the damages agreed. I award the plaintiff <damage type = "total">$2,300,000</damage>, plus costs and interest under the Court Order Interest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 79.
144  Should the parties wish to make submissions on the issue of costs, they may arrange a time to appear before me with the Registry.
L.D. RUSSELL J.
End of Document
Paskall v. Scheithauer, [2012] B.C.J. No. 2601
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
N.H. Smith J.
Heard: October 26, 2012.
Judgment: December 11, 2012.
Docket: M074718
Registry: Vancouver
[2012] B.C.J. No. 2601   |
Between Rhiannon Elizabeth Paskall, Plaintiff, and Gabriel Joseph Scheithauer, Respondent
(38 paras.)
Case Summary
Civil litigation — Costs — Particular circumstances — Where success divided — Offers to settle — Amount of offer v. award — Application by defendant for deduction of accident benefits from award and for reduction in plaintiff's costs allowed in part — While in marked crosswalk, plaintiff was stuck by defendant's vehicle — Jury found defendant 80 per cent liable, and awarded damages <damage type = "total after">$65,920</damage>, which was less than 10 per cent of defendant's final offer to settle — Defendant failed to prove plaintiff was entitled to benefits for which deduction was sought, but plaintiff conceded to deduction of $20,900 for advance and benefits received — Costs reduced to 80 per cent in proportion to liability — Plaintiff not unreasonable in rejecting offer.
Damages — Assessment of damages — Measure of damages — Deductions — Application by defendant for deduction of accident benefits from award and for reduction in plaintiff's costs allowed in part — While in marked crosswalk, plaintiff was stuck by defendant's vehicle — Jury found defendant 80 per cent liable, and awarded damages <damage type = "total after">$65,920</damage>, which was less than 10 per cent of defendant's final offer to settle — Defendant failed to prove plaintiff was entitled to benefits for which deduction was sought, but plaintiff conceded to deduction of $20,900 for advance and benefits received — Costs reduced to 80 per cent in proportion to liability — Plaintiff not unreasonable in rejecting offer.
Damages — Proceedings — Practice and procedure — Costs — Considerations — Offers to settle — Application by defendant for deduction of accident benefits from award and for reduction in plaintiff's costs allowed in part — While in marked crosswalk, plaintiff was stuck by defendant's vehicle — Jury found defendant 80 per cent liable, and awarded damages <damage type = "total after">$65,920</damage>, which was less than 10 per cent of defendant's final offer to settle — Defendant failed to prove plaintiff was entitled to benefits for which deduction was sought, but plaintiff conceded to deduction of $20,900 for advance and benefits received — Costs reduced to 80 per cent in proportion to liability — Plaintiff not unreasonable in rejecting offer.
Application by the defendant for a deduction of the accident benefits payable to the plaintiff from the award of damages, apportionment of costs payable to the plaintiff and costs arising from the plaintiff's rejection of offers to settle. In 2005, the then 20-year-old plaintiff was struck by the defendant's vehicle while she was a pedestrian in a marked crosswalk. The plaintiff, who suffered from cerebral palsy, claimed she suffered a traumatic brain injury and acceleration of physical deterioration that might have occurred in the future due to cerebral palsy. Her claim included claims for lost earning capacity and cost of future care totalling more than $2 million. After a 19-day trial in June 2012, a jury found the defendant 80 per cent liable for the plaintiff's injuries and assessed the plaintiff's total damages at <damage type = "total">$82,400</damage>. Damages were reduced to <damage type = "total after">$65,920</damage> based on the finding of contributory negligence. The defendant made two formal offers to settle. The first offer, made in April 2011 shortly before the first-scheduled trial date, was for <damage type = "other">$300,000</damage>. The second offer, made in April 2012, was for <damage type = "other">$700,000</damage>. The defendant sought deductions for rehabilitation benefits payable that the plaintiff was eligible to receive in the future under the Insurance (Vehicle) Act and Regulations including <damage type = "other">$22,155</damage> for future replacement hearing aids, <damage type = "other">$9,672</damage> for physiotherapy and <damage type = "other">$5,278</damage> for occupational therapy. 

HELD: Application allowed in part.
 The plaintiff conceded that the <damage type = "other">$20,000</damage> advance she received from the defendants and the <damage type = "other">$900</damage> she received from ICBC as total disability benefits must be deducted from the award. The defendant failed to prove that the plaintiff was entitled to the benefits for which the deduction was sought. The replacement hearing aids and related expenses were a discretionary benefit that ICBC was not bound to pay. Physiotherapy and occupational therapy were mandatory benefits, but only if they expenses were incurred as a result of the injury sustained in the accident. The plaintiff's costs were reduced to 80 per cent. As the defendant was successful on the issue of contributory negligence, there was no basis to depart from the usual rule set out in s. 3(1) of the Negligence Act that costs be in the same proportion as liability. As the plaintiff did not act unreasonably in rejecting the offers to settle given the medical evidence, she was entitled to her costs as if the offers had not been made.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Insurance (Vehicle) Act, , s. 83(2)
Insurance (Vehicle) Regulation, , s. 88(1), s. 88(2), s. 96
Negligence Act, (1)
Supreme Court Civil Rules, Rule 9-1, Rule 9-1(5), Rule 9-1(6), Rule 9-1(6)(a)
Supreme Court Rules, Rule 37B
Counsel
Counsel for Plaintiff: S. Turner.
Counsel for Respondent: K. Armstrong, S.B. Stewart.
Reasons for Judgment
N.H. SMITH J.
1   After a 19 day trial of this personal injury action, a jury found the defendant 80 per cent liable for the plaintiff's injuries, but awarded damages that will be less than 10 per cent of the defendant's most recent formal offer to settle.
2  The defendant now seeks a deduction from the award for benefits payable under the Part 7 of the Insurance (Vehicle) Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 231 [Act] regulations, Insurance (Vehicle) Regulation,  [Regulations], apportionment of the costs payable to the plaintiff, and costs arising from the plaintiff's rejection of offers to settle. The combined effect of these orders would probably leave the plaintiff with a liability for costs far in excess of her net judgment.
3  The plaintiff is now 27 years old and is a pre-school teacher/day care worker. She was 20 when she was struck by the defendant's car while she was a pedestrian in a marked crosswalk on November 27, 2005. In its verdict of June 21, 2012 the jury assessed the plaintiff's total damages at <damage type = "total">$82,400</damage>. The finding of 20 per cent contributory negligence will reduce that amount to <damage type = "total after">$65,920</damage>.
4  The defendant made two formal offers to settle. The first, for <damage type = "other">$300,000</damage>, was made on April 7, 2011, shortly before a then-scheduled trial date. The defendant then successfully applied for an adjournment of the trial, but was ordered, as a condition of the adjournment, to make an advance payment of <damage type = "other">$20,000</damage>. The second offer, made on April 26, 2012, was for <damage type = "other">$700,000</damage>, including the <damage type = "other">$20,000</damage> advance. The plaintiff's claim at trial included claims for lost earning capacity and cost of future care totalling more than <damage type = "other">$2 million</damage>.
5  In addition to liability, the major issues at trial were the extent of the plaintiff's traumatic brain injury and the significance of a pre-existing condition. The plaintiff was born with cerebral palsy, which, prior to the accident, affected her mobility, but not her mental functioning.
6  The plaintiff contended that she had suffered a severe and permanent brain injury, as well as acceleration of physical deterioration that might have occurred in the future due to cerebral palsy. The defendant agreed the plaintiff suffered a brain injury, but said she recovered well from it and any continuing symptoms are subtle and relatively mild. As for any physical problems the plaintiff may have now or in the future, the defendant said these are part of the ordinary process of cerebral palsy and are unrelated to the accident. There was no dispute that the plaintiff also suffered a moderate left-side hearing loss, which was related to her head injury and skull fracture.
Part 7 Deductions
7  The plaintiff concedes that the $20,000 advance must be deducted from the award, along with $900.90 that the plaintiff received from the Insurance Corporation of B.C. ("ICBC" or the "corporation") as total disability benefits. The defendant seeks a further deduction of $37,104.20, representing rehabilitation benefits he says the plaintiff is eligible to receive in the future. That deduction, along with those agreed to, would reduce the plaintiff's net award, before any consideration of costs, to $7,914.90.
8  The jury's assessment of damages included $36,100 for the cost of future care. That was far less than even the amount suggested by the defendant's expert on the cost of future care, to say nothing of the plaintiff's expert, so it is impossible to know what future expenses the jury accepted. The jury accepted almost all of the plaintiff's claim for special costs, which included some past physiotherapy treatment.
9  The Act and the Regulations made under it provide for payment of certain medical and rehabilitation benefits. Where a plaintiff has been awarded a judgment for cost of future care, deductions are to be made for benefits the plaintiff has received or is entitled to receive under that scheme. Section 83(2) of the Act reads:
A person who has a claim for damages and who receives or is entitled to receive benefits respecting the loss on which the claim is based, is deemed to have released the claim to the extent of the benefits.
(This action is governed by a previous statute that was in force at the time of the accident, but the relevant provisions are substantially the same.)
10  The benefits to which s. 83 refers are benefits prescribed under Part 7 of the Regulations, including s. 88, which reads in part:
88 (1) Where an insured is injured in an accident for which benefits are provided under this Part, the corporation shall, subject to subsections (5) and (6), pay as benefits all reasonable expenses incurred by the insured as a result of the injury for necessary medical, surgical, dental, hospital, ambulance or professional nursing services, or for necessary physical therapy, chiropractic treatment, occupational therapy or speech therapy or for prosthesis or orthosis.
...
Where, in the opinion of the corporation's medical adviser, provision of any one or more of the following is likely to promote the rehabilitation of an insured who is injured in an accident for which benefits are provided under this Part, the corporation may provide any one or more of the following:
...
reimbursement to the insured for costs incurred from time to time by the insured for the purchase and reasonable repair, adjustment or replacement of one or more of the following items:
...
aids for communication, dressing, eating, grooming and hygiene;
...
The corporation is not liable to pay for more than 12 physical therapy treatments for an insured for each accident unless, before any additional treatment is given, the corporation's medical advisor or the insured's medical practitioner certifies to the corporation in writing that, in his opinion, the treatment is necessary for the insured.
11  Some benefits are mandatory under s. 88 (1), while others are discretionary under s. 88 (2). In Li v. Newson,  at para 14, Abrioux J. summarized some of the governing principles relevant to an application for deduction of benefits:
the defendant bears the onus of proving that the plaintiff is entitled to the benefits which the defendant seeks to deduct;
strict compliance with the statute is required;
uncertainty as to whether a Part 7 benefit will be paid must be resolved in favour of the plaintiff;
the ability to make the deduction is not dependant on the actual receipt of benefits by the plaintiff. Issues between the plaintiff and ICBC regarding the benefits are not relevant to the deductibility by a tort-feasor from an award to the plaintiff;
it is no longer a requirement that there be a match between the heads of damage for a tort award and specific heads of damages under the benefit recovery scheme;
the task of the court is to estimate the amount of Part 7 benefits, if any, the plaintiff is or would be entitled to receive for the costs reflected in the future care award. It then must make the appropriate deduction;
benefits under s. 88 (2) of the Regulations arise when ICBC's medical adviser holds the opinion that the costs are "likely to promote the rehabilitation" of the plaintiff. The term "rehabilitation" is defined in s. 78 of the Regulation as follows:
"Rehabilitation" means the restoration, in the shortest practical time, of an injured person to the highest level of gainful employment or self-sufficiency that, allowing for the permanent effects of his injuries, is, with medical and vocational assistance, reasonably achievable by him.
the uncertainty of the entitlement of payment created by the Regulation may lead the court to conclude that only a nominal deduction is appropriate. Trial judges must be cautious in their approach to determining the estimate inasmuch as a reduction results in a lessening of the award in the tort action. If that is a result of uncertainty created by the Regulation, ICBC cannot be heard to complain;
the court is to take into account ICBC's discretion with respect to whether certain amounts will be paid in addition to restrictions in the Regulation with respect to amounts payable.
12  The deductions sought by the defendant are for future replacement hearing aids and related expenses ($22,155), physiotherapy ($9,672) and occupational therapy ($5,278). Those figures are based on the recommendations contained in the report of the defendant's future care expert and the present value of those recommendations as calculated by the defendant's economic expert. The total present value of the defendant's expert's care recommendations was <damage type = "other">$127,169</damage>.
13  The replacement hearing aids and related expenses are a discretionary benefit under s. 88(2). The defendant has provided an affidavit from an ICBC claims examiner who says that the corporation paid for a hearing aid on one occasion, in January 2007, and who says: "I expect ICBC will continue to re-imburse reasonable incurred hearing aid expenses".
14  The examiner's stated expectation falls far short of the evidence required. Before discretionary benefits can be paid, s. 88(2) requires an opinion from "the corporation's medical advisor". No evidence from any such person has been put forward. The expert who provided a care opinion for the defendant at trial is an occupational therapist. There is no evidence that ICBC accepts her in the capacity of its "medical advisor" for purposes of s. 88.
15  Although the opinion of a medical advisor is a precondition to the payment of discretionary benefits, the corporation is still not bound to pay them. The examiner's expectation is no more than an opinion about what his employer will do in the future. There is no evidence that he has the authority to make that decision and no explanation of the basis on which he feels able to express an opinion on what the corporation will do for the remainder of the plaintiff's life.
16  Physiotherapy and occupational therapy are mandatory benefits under s. 88(1), but only if the expenses are incurred "as a result of the injury" sustained in an accident. That must be read in conjunction with s. 96, which reads:
The corporation is not liable to pay benefits under this Part in respect of the injury or death of a person
...
whose injury or death is caused, directly or indirectly, by sickness or disease, unless the sickness or disease was contracted as a direct result of an accident for which benefits are provided under this Part.
17  The Regulations would therefore permit the corporation to refuse to pay these expenses on the basis that the need for them arose from the plaintiff's pre-existing cerebral palsy, not from the injury suffered in the accident. That position would be entirely consistent with what the defendant argued, with apparent success, at trial.
18  At this stage of the proceeding, I believe it is appropriate to acknowledge the fact that in cases such as this the corporation has conduct of the defence on behalf of its insured. There is certainly no evidence that the corporation now disavows the position it instructed counsel to take at trial.
19  Accordingly, I find that the defendant has failed to meet the onus of proving the plaintiff is entitled to the benefits for which deduction has been sought.
Apportionment of Costs
20  The defendant seeks an order that the plaintiff receive only 80 per cent of her costs, reflecting the division of liability. This arises from s. 3(1) of the Negligence Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 333:
3 (1) Unless the court otherwise directs, the liability for costs of the parties to every action is in the same proportion as their respective liability to make good the damage or loss.
21  Although payment of costs in proportion to the degree of liability is the default rule, the court has discretion to depart from it. That departure must be for reasons connected with the case, with the principle consideration being whether application of the usual rule will result in an injustice: Moses v. Kim,  at para 70.
22  In Moses the plaintiff was found to be 65 per cent at fault for an accident and was awarded damages of <damage type = "other">$218,050</damage>, which was about a quarter of what he had sought and a third of the total assessed at trial. The trial judge awarded the plaintiff 90 per cent of his taxable costs. The factors considered by the trial judge included the severity of the plaintiff's injuries, the defendant's denial of liability, the amount of damages, the plaintiff's legal fees and the fact that only one day of evidence and one-half day of argument in a nine-day trial was devoted to the issue of liability.
23  The Court of Appeal reduced the recovery of costs to 75 per cent, saying that the trial judge erred in considering the plaintiff's legal fees as well as in failing to consider the defendant's success on contributory negligence.
24  In Bourelle v. Andrychuk  (BCCA), a jury found the plaintiff 90 per cent at fault. The trial judge awarded the plaintiff 100 per cent of his costs. The Court of Appeal reduced that to two-thirds, based on the division of trial time between liability and damages issues.
25  In Burdett (Guardian ad litem of) v. Mohamed, , a jury awarded damages of <damage type = "other">$1.8 million</damage>, after a 20 per cent reduction for contributory negligence. Boyd J. awarded the plaintiff 90 per cent of taxable costs, and 100 per cent of most disbursements but only 80 per cent of disbursements related to liability.
26  A common feature of all of these cases is that the plaintiff had substantial success in proving injury and damages. Based on the jury's verdict, that cannot be said to be the case here. In those circumstances, I cannot ignore the defendant's success on the contributory negligence issue and can find no basis on which to depart from the usual rule set out in s. 3(1) of the Negligence Act.
Offers to Settle
27  Rule 9-1 of the Supreme Court Civil Rules provides for pre-trial offers to settle, which the court may later consider when exercising its discretion in relation to costs. Rules 9-1(5) and (6) read:
In a proceeding in which an offer to settle has been made, the court may do one or more of the following:
deprive a party of any or all of the costs, including any or all of the disbursements, to which the party would otherwise be entitled in respect of all or some of the steps taken in the proceeding after the date of delivery or service of the offer to settle;
award double costs of all or some of the steps taken in the proceeding after the date of delivery or service of the offer to settle;
award to a party, in respect of all or some of the steps taken in the proceeding after the date of delivery or service of the offer to settle, costs to which the party would have been entitled had the offer not been made;
if the offer was made by a defendant and the judgment awarded to the plaintiff was no greater than the amount of the offer to settle, award to the defendant the defendant's costs in respect of all or some of the steps taken in the proceeding after the date of delivery or service of the offer to settle. [am. B.C. Reg. 119/2010, Sch. A, s. 21.]
In making an order under subrule (5), the court may consider the following:
whether the offer to settle was one that ought reasonably to have been accepted, either on the date that the offer to settle was delivered or served or on any later date;
the relationship between the terms of settlement offered and the final judgment of the court;
the relative financial circumstances of the parties;
any other factor the court considers appropriate.
28  Rule 9-1 is identical in wording and effect to former R. 37B, which in turn replaced a rule under which a plaintiff's failure to obtain a judgment in excess of an offer to settle resulted in mandatory costs consequences. The current rule gives the court "what is clearly intended to be an unfettered discretion": Bailey v. Jang,  at para 19.
29  The underlying purpose of the rule is to encourage settlement by rewarding the party who makes a reasonable offer and penalizing the party who declines to accept such an offer: AE (Litigation guardian of) v. DWJ,  at para 61, aff'd . In Dempsey v. Oh,  at para 19, it is made clear that "[i]t is not the court's function to ensure that a plaintiff makes a net recovery from an action when it has ignored a reasonable offer." However, this Court has said that "one should be cautious, with the advantage of hindsight, in equating having guessed wrongly with having been unreasonable in rejecting an offer": Lumanlan v. Sadler,  at para 35; Fan v. Chana,  at para 19.
30  Some of the factors the court may consider in exercising its discretion are set out in R. 9-1(6). The first of these--and, in my view, the most important in this case--is whether the offer ought reasonably to have been accepted. In Hartshorne v. Hartshorne,  the Court of Appeal said at para 27:
The first factor - whether the offer to settle was one that ought reasonably to have been accepted - is not determined by reference to the award that was ultimately made. Rather, in considering that factor, the court must determine whether, at the time that the offer was open for acceptance, it would have been reasonable for it to have been accepted: Bailey v. Jang, ,  at para. 24; A.E. v. D.W.J. at para. 55. As was said in A.E. v. D.W.J., "The reasonableness of the plaintiff's decision not to accept the offer to settle must be assessed without reference to the court's decision" (para. 55). Instead, the reasonableness is to be assessed by considering such factors as the timing of the offer, whether it had some relationship to the claim (as opposed to simply being a "nuisance offer"), whether it could be easily evaluated, and whether some rationale for the offer was provided. We do not intend this to be a comprehensive list, nor do we suggest that each of these factors will necessarily be relevant in a given case.
31  One test that has been applied on this question is whether "reasonable counsel aware of all of the evidence in this case but unaware of the jury award ought to have encouraged the plaintiff to accept the offer at the time it was made": Khunkhun v. Titus,  at para 25.
32  In order to determine whether an offer is reasonable and ought to be accepted, the plaintiff must be able to consider it in relation to the evidence expected at trial and the apparent range of possible outcomes. In a personal injury case, that exercise usually includes consideration of conflicting medical opinions, along with the possibility and likely consequences of the court preferring certain opinions over others. Plaintiff's counsel who is relying on an opinion from Dr. X can advise his or her client of the reduction in damages that may result from the court rejecting the evidence of Dr. X and accepting the opinion of Dr. Y that is being relied on by the defendant.
33  In this case, the evidence relied on by the plaintiff included opinions of a neuroradiologist, a neuropsychologist, a psychiatrist, an otolaryngologist and two physiatrists. The only experts put forward by the defendant on the question of damages were the occupational therapist dealing with cost of future care and the economist. The defendant served no medical expert opinions, although the plaintiff had attended two independent medical examinations at the request of defence counsel.
34  The onus of proof at trial is on the plaintiff. The defendant is under no obligation to produce medical evidence and may rely entirely on cross-examination of the plaintiff and the plaintiff's medical experts to support an argument that the plaintiff has failed to prove damages. That is what defence counsel chose to do in this case, apparently with great success.
35  But the onus of proof at trial is not necessarily relevant to the question of whether an offer made before trial "had some relationship to the claim" or "could be easily evaluated". In choosing to defend this case in the way he did, the defendant also chose not to provide the plaintiff with evidence on which she could judge the reasonableness of the offers to settle. With the plaintiff's medical reports in hand, and in the absence of contrary medical opinions, I do not see how reasonable counsel could have recommended acceptance of either of the defendant's offers or justified such a recommendation to the plaintiff.
36  A second factor for consideration set out in R. 9-1(6) is the relationship between the offer and the final judgment. However, the court cautioned against putting too much weight on this factor in cases involving jury trials, given the unpredictability of jury awards: Smagh v. Bumbrah,  at paras 13-14.
37  In this case, I find the consideration under R. 9-1(6)(a) to be determinative. I am not only unable to say the offers ought reasonably to have been accepted, but I find that they could not reasonably have been accepted in the context of the evidentiary vacuum in which they were presented. I conclude the plaintiff is entitled to her costs as if the offers had not been made.
Conclusion
38  After deductions in respect of contributory negligence, the advance and total disability benefits, the plaintiff will have judgment for <damage type = "total after">$45,019.10</damage>, plus 80 per cent of her taxable costs and disbursements.
N.H. SMITH J.
End of Document
Salgado v. Toth, [2009] B.C.J. No. 2230
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
G.D. Burnyeat J.
Heard: May 25-29, 2009.
Judgment: November 9, 2009.
Docket: S073646
Registry: Vancouver
[2009] B.C.J. No. 2230   |   2009 BCSC 1515   |   72 C.C.L.T. (3d) 130   |   2009 CarswellBC 3020   |   182 A.C.W.S. (3d) 211
Between Manuel Ignacio Salgado and Nora Gabriela Calcaneo, Plaintiffs, and Imre Toth and 659279 B.C. Ltd. doing business as HomePro Inspections, Grahame Harold Shannon, Shirley Yap Shannon, the District of North Vancouver and Cesar Parayno, Defendants
(83 paras.)
Case Summary
Contracts — Terms — Express terms — Exclusion clauses — Action by owners against property inspector for damages for negligence allowed and owners awarded damages of <damage type = "total">$192,920</damage> — Owners retained inspector and his company to prepare inspection report for property prior to purchase — Inspector negligent in his inspection of beams on both sides of house, in failing to inspect some beams, and in not recommending geotechnical review of property — While inspector's repair estimate was woefully inadequate, damages were not available to owners as a result of this negligent misrepresentation because owners did not rely on this misrepresentation to their detriment.
Contracts — Interpretation — General principles — Construction against originator or contra proferentem rule — Action by owners against property inspector for damages for negligence allowed and owners awarded damages of <damage type = "total">$192,920</damage> — Owners retained inspector and his company to prepare inspection report for property prior to purchase — Inspector negligent in his inspection of beams on both sides of house, in failing to inspect some beams, and in not recommending geotechnical review of property — While inspector's repair estimate was woefully inadequate, damages were not available to owners as a result of this negligent misrepresentation because owners did not rely on this misrepresentation to their detriment.
Tort law — Negligence — Duty and standard of care — Duty of care — Action by owners against property inspector for damages for negligence allowed and owners awarded damages of <damage type = "total">$192,920</damage> — Owners retained inspector and his company to prepare inspection report for property prior to purchase — Inspector negligent in his inspection of beams on both sides of house, in failing to inspect some beams, and in not recommending geotechnical review of property.
Tort law — Fraud and misrepresentation — Negligent misrepresentation (Hedley Byrne principle — Particular relationships — Sale of land — Action by owners against property inspector for damages for negligence allowed and owners awarded damages of <damage type = "total">$192,920</damage> — Owners retained inspector and his company to prepare inspection report for property prior to purchase — Inspector negligent in his inspection of beams on both sides of house, in failing to inspect some beams, and in not recommending geotechnical review of property — While inspector's repair estimate was woefully inadequate, damages were not available to owners as a result of this negligent misrepresentation because owners did not rely on this misrepresentation to their detriment.
Action by the owners, Salgado and Calcaneo, against Toth for damages for negligent misrepresentation and negligence. The owners purchased a house consisting of an A-frame structure built during the early 1960s and an addition that was constructed in the late 1980s. The house was on a steep sloping lot. They agreed to pay <damage type = "other">$1,095,000</damage> for the property, and the agreement was "subject to an inspection report and bank approval to the Buyers' satisfaction on or before five week days after acceptance." The owners retained Toth and his company, HomePro Inspections, to prepare an inspection report for the property. Toth inspected the house and provided both a written and a verbal report to the owners. He received <damage type = "other">$450</damage> for his services. The owners alleged that Toth breached his duty of care by failing to inspect all of the A-frame beams for rot and moisture, by failing to fully advise them regarding the extent of the structural problems relating to the house, and by failing to advise the owners to retain a structural engineer. They further alleged that Toth made various statements regarding the cost of correcting the problems that he found (<damage type = "other">$20,000</damage>), and that the statements amounted to negligent misrepresentation. Toth denied the allegations, and relied on his contract with the owners to limit his liability. Salgado did not read the contract before signing it. The parties agreed that the cost of the work to remedy the problems with the house totalled <damage type = "total">$192,920</damage>. 

HELD: Action in negligence allowed and owners awarded damages of <damage type = "total">$192,920</damage>.
 Toth was negligent in his inspection of the horizontal and vertical beams on both sides of the house. He also was negligent in not inspecting the east side beams, and in his inspection of the west side beams by either inspecting only two and not advising the owners that he had only done so, or by not drawing to their attention that the rot was much more widespread than he indicated to them. His breaches of duty of care caused the owners to suffer damages. But for the negligent act and/or the omission, the damages would not have occurred as the owners would not have purchased the property if the full extent of the rot on the east and west side beams of the house had been known and brought to their attention. Toth was negligent in not recommending a geotechnical review of the property and by not clearly presenting the significance of the problems he observed. Toth owed the owners a duty of care, and this duty was not met because he did not recommend to the owners that they should consult a geotechnical engineer prior to deciding whether to proceed with the purchase of the property. The owners relied upon the advice received from Toth before deciding whether they would remove the subject clauses contained within the contract and proceed to purchase the property. As a result of the owners' reliance on the advice received from Toth regarding the stability of the house, the owners proceeded to purchase the property and suffered damages as a result of that purchase. Toth's repair estimate was woefully inadequate. While damages were not available to the owners as a result of this negligent misrepresentation of the likely cost of the structural changes that were required in order to provide stability for the house because the owners did not rely on this misrepresentation to their detriment, the estimate gave considerable solace to the owners that the structural expenditures would not be excessive and, therefore, the structural problems were not significant. The owners were entitled to the actual cost of the structural changes which were required, including engineering costs, less the estimate provided by Toth. It was incumbent upon Toth to draw to the attention of Salgado the exclusion and waiver clauses in the contract and to take reasonable steps to apprise Salgado of the onerous terms and to ensure that he read and understood them. The doctrine of contra proferentem applied and any "guarantee or warranty, express or implied" related to the adequacy, performance or condition of any inspected structure, item or system at the time of the inspection was not excluded by the limitation of liability paragraph.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
British Columbia Supreme Court Rules, Rule 37(b)
Negligence Act, RSBC 1996, CHAPTER 333,
Counsel
Counsel for Plaintiffs: F.R. Eadie.
Counsel for Defendants Imre Toth and 659279 B.C. Ltd., dba HomePro Inspections: G.S. Miller and C. Tham.
Reasons for Judgment
G.D. BURNYEAT J.
1   The Plaintiffs purchased a property in North Vancouver having a building lot that had a steep slope along the southern perimeter of the lot ("Property") and a house consisting of an A-frame structure built during the early 1960s and an addition that was constructed in the late 1980s ("House").
2  The former owners listed the Property for sale during the summer of 2006 at a listing price of <damage type = "other">$1,195,000.00</damage>. By a September 15, 2006 contract of purchase and sale ("Agreement"), the Plaintiffs agreed to pay <damage type = "other">$1,095,000.00</damage> for the Property with the purchase to complete on October 27, 2006. The Agreement was "subject to an inspection report and bank approval to the Buyers' satisfaction on or before 5 week days after acceptance".
3  At the recommendation of their real estate agent, the Plaintiffs retained the Defendants, Imre Toth and 659279 B.C. Ltd. doing business as HomePro Inspections ("Mr. Toth") to prepare an inspection report for the Property. Mr. Toth came to the Property, inspected the House, and provided both a written and a verbal report to the Plaintiffs. Mr. Toth received <damage type = "other">$450.50</damage> for his services.
4  The Plaintiffs allege that Mr. Toth made certain statements about the cost of repairing the Property and that those representations constitute negligent misrepresentations that were relied upon by the Plaintiffs. At the same time, the Plaintiffs allege that Mr. Toth conducted the inspection of the Property in a negligent manner and failed to identify and warn the Plaintiffs of a number of material defects. Mr. Toth denies those allegations, and, in any event, relies on his contract with the Plaintiffs to limit any liability that he might have.
5  The Plaintiffs have settled with the Defendants, Grahame Harold Shannon and Shirley Yap Shannon, who were the former owners, have discontinued their action against Alfredo Lavaggi and Sussex Realty Corporation, carrying on business as Prudential Sussex Realty and the said Sussex Realty Corporation, and have discontinued their action against the District of North Vancouver and Cesar Parayno, an engineer. Accordingly, the Plaintiffs do not seek from the Defendants any damages or other relief for any portion of the loss, damage or expense alleged which may be attributed to the fault of those Defendants and expressly waive any right in this Action to recover from the Defendants, Imre Toth and 659279 B.C. Ltd., any amount which the other Defendants would be liable to indemnify Imre Toth and 659279 B.C. Ltd. in third party proceedings.
6  By agreement, the parties accept that the cost of remedial work to remedy certain problems with the House totals <damage type = "other">$192,920.45, made up as follows: (a) "A" Frame Beams -- west side of the House (<damage type = "other">$35,000.00</damage>); (b) "A" Frame Beams -- east side of the House (<damage type = "other">$18,800.00</damage>); (c) Stabilization of House (<damage type = "other">$56,800.00</damage>); (d) Engineering (<damage type = "other">$26,269.00</damage>, comprised of costs incurred to date of <damage type = "other">$16,269.00</damage>, and estimated future costs of <damage type = "other">$10,000.00</damage>); (e) West side deck removal (<damage type = "other">$9,360.00</damage>); (f) replacement of the west deck (<damage type = "other">$24,100.00</damage>); and (g) a shoring up of the east deck (<damage type = "other">$11,500.00</damage>).
7  With G.S.T. of <damage type = "other">$9,091.45</damage>, and a contingency of <damage type = "other">$22,000.00</damage>, the total cost of the required remedial work is <damage type = "other">$212,920.45</damage>. From that amount, the Plaintiffs subtract the <damage type = "other">$20,000.00</damage> that Mr. Toth estimated the remedial work would cost and claim <damage type = "other">$192,920.45</damage>, as well as pre-judgment interest and Scale "B" costs.
BACKGROUND
8  Alfredo Lavaggi was a realtor who was contacted by the Plaintiffs. Mr. Lavaggi introduced the Property to the Plaintiffs and acted as their agent with respect to the purchase of the Property.
9  At the recommendation of Mr. Lavaggi, Mr. Toth was requested to prepare a home inspection report. Mr. Toth inspected the Property and House on September 21, 2006. In accordance with his testimony at Trial, I find that Mr. Toth took about 30 minutes to inspect the roof and the "rest of the exterior of the House". I make no conclusions about how long Mr. Toth spent to inspect the interior of the House.
10  After completing his inspection, Mr. Toth met with the Plaintiffs, discussed what was in the written part of his report, discussed other matters about the Property and the House with the Plaintiffs, and received payment from the Plaintiffs for providing his services. Sometime during that meeting, a contract with the Defendant, 659279 BC Ltd. doing business as HomePro Inspections, was signed by Mr. Salgado ("Contract"). Ms. Calcaneo did not sign the Contract. While the Contract defines "659279 BC Ltd. dba HomePro Inspections" as the "Inspector", the Contract is signed by Mr. Toth in a space above the words: "INSPECTOR IMRE TOTH 659279 BC LTD. HOMEPRO INSPECTIONS".
11  After receiving the written and verbal report of Mr. Toth, Mr. Salgado phoned Mr. Lavaggi to discuss what he had been told. At his March 12, 2008 Examination for Discovery, Mr. Lavaggi was asked the following questions and gave the following answers:
But he [Mr. Salgado] might have said there's a reference here to a structural problem?
He did mention, as I said to you before, that he was told there was structural and foundation problems.
Did he indicate to you what the extent of those problems were? Other than --
He talked about it and that they were major, that they were significant.
Did he say what the dollar value of the problem was?
I don't recall.
12  The Plaintiffs removed the subject clauses on the Agreement, the purchase in the name of both Plaintiffs completed on schedule, and the Plaintiffs took possession of the Property.
THE CONTRACT
13  The Contract signed by Mr. Salgado on September 21, 2006 contained a number of provisions, including the following (capitalization and bold print as set out in the Contract):
The INSPECTOR will perform a VISUAL INSPECTION of the readily accessible and visible areas of the major systems and components of the Primary Residence on the Property and certain built-in equipment and improvements. The inspection and report are not intended to reflect on the market value of the Property nor to make any recommendation as to the advisability of purchase.
The condition of certain systems, components and equipment will be randomly sampled by the inspector. Examples of such systems, components and equipment are window/door operation and hardware, electrical receptacles, switches and lights, cabinet/countertop mounts and functions, insulation depth, mortar, masonry, paint and caulking integrity and roof covering materials. Furniture, rugs, appliances, stored items, etc. will not be moved for the inspection.
The INSPECTOR will give a professional opinion on whether those items inspected are performing their intended function at the time of the inspection or are in need of immediate repair. The inspection and report are based upon observations of conditions that exist at the time the inspection was performed.
Cost estimates, if provided, are "ballpark" estimates only and are not intended to be relied upon by any person for accuracy. The CLIENT should obtain written bids from qualified licensed contractors in order to determine the possible cost of repairs.
This inspection is performed in accordance with the Code of Ethics and Standards of Practice of the Canadian Association of Home and Property Inspectors (CAHPI), a copy of which is attached to this report.
The Client is encouraged to participate in the visual inspection process and accepts responsibility for the consequences of electing not to do so, i.e. incomplete information being available to the Inspector. This Client's participation shall be at the Client's own risk for injuries, falls, property damage, etc;
9. THE INSPECTION AND REPORT ARE NOT INTENDED NOR ARE TO BE USED AS A GUARANTEE OR WARRANTY, EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, REGARDING THE FUTURE ADEQUACY, PERFORMANCE OR CONDITION OF ANY INSPECTED STRUCTURE, ITEM OR SYSTEM. THE INSPECTOR IS NOT AN INSURER OF ANY INSPECTED CONDITIONS.
It is understood and agreed that should the INSPECTOR be found liable for any loss or damages resulting from a failure to perform any obligations, including but not limited to negligence, breach of contract, or otherwise, then the liability of the INSPECTOR shall be limited to a sum equal to the amount of the fee paid by the CLIENT for the Inspection and Report.
In the event that the CLIENT claims damages against the INSPECTOR and does not prove those damages, the CLIENT shall pay all legal fees, arbitrator/mediator fees, legal expenses and costs by the INSPECTOR in defence of the claim.
By signing the Property Inspection Contract, the CLIENT acknowledges, covenants and agrees that:
The CLIENT understands and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this contract;
The INSPECTOR has not made any representations or warranties other than those contained in the Contract;
The TOTAL fee payable at the time of the visual inspection of the Subject Property shall be <damage type = "other">$450.50</damage>.
The CLIENT shall pay the fees described above to the inspector without set-off or deduction.
14  At Trial, Mr. Toth stated that he understood that the Plaintiffs would be available at 12:00 noon on the 21st so that he could provide them with his "presentation" regarding the inspection. The Plaintiffs did not arrive as Mr. Toth anticipated:
I cannot recall exactly the time when they arrived. And I believe I expressed my frustration, because we agreed upon a time, and I felt ignored and disrespectfully treated, so I was having quite a ... [frustrating] time. I expressed them I have other things to do than waiting for people, and I scheduled this, as I told, my presentation between 12:00 and 1:00, and I have other things to do. And that was what I said, and then I started discussing the report.
15  At his December 26, 2008, Examination for Discovery, Mr. Salgado stated that he arrived at the Property at about 12:30. I conclude that the presentation of Mr. Toth took between 30 and 45 minutes, and, in addition to the written and verbal report provided by Mr. Toth, Mr. Toth and the Plaintiffs visited some of the areas within the House during that time. At Trial, Mr. Toth was asked how long he spent after the presentation of the written and verbal report going through the House with the Plaintiffs and he stated: "15, 20 or more minutes after the structural presentation."
16  At Trial, Mr. Toth stated that his contract would usually be signed by both parties at the beginning of the inspection if all parties were present but, if not present, then at the time before the inspection was discussed. At Trial, Mr. Toth stated that it was his "usual practice" that approximately 99% of his written report was "fully blank until the presentation with my client starts", but that, if the client was not present, then "for time management and killing the empty time", he would fill in most if not all of the written portion of his report prior to the client being present. Mr. Toth stated that the Contract was signed before any kind of presentation on September 21, 2006. I find that the Contract was signed after virtually all of the written portion of the report was added to the report.
17  At his October 17, 2007 Examination for Discovery, Mr. Toth stated that he completed the report, invited the Plaintiffs to sit down, and then "... introduced this inspection report system". At Trial, Mr. Toth stated that, after Mr. Salgado filled in his name and address on the Contract, he then said to Mr. Salgado:
This is the property inspection contract. Opening the book, showing the contract, I told, in Canada, every home inspection conducted by a member of the national association has to have this written agreement signed. I did my part. I'm asking him to review it and fill the top part and sign it at the bottom. He reviewed it and then signed it, filled it and signed it.
Since I'm not sure my clients how much they understanding or reading from my contract, this is my standard practice, to briefly point out three major elements. I'm calling them three major elements. Is the number 1 is inspection -- this regarding to the scope of inspection, sentences 1 to 4. I briefly summarizing those section as the nature of my inspection is visual inspection. ...
And then second cornerstone or significant information is I'm following the standard of practice and code of ethics ... and that was the 5 and 6. And I called the so-called sentence number 9 printed in bold capital lettering, I named it as a third major information, it telling inspection is not an insurance policy, not a warranty or assuring or one of the -- any conditions. This is a standard no matter how much time my clients spending reading or not reading, I'm pointing always out these three areas.
WRITTEN REPORT
18  The written report prepared by Mr. Toth started with a "The Big Picture/Summary" page. The form of report was prepared by Mr. Toth after consulting with a lawyer and after incorporating the recommended contract form of the Canadian Association of Home and Property Inspectors of B.C. ("CAHPI (BC)"). The "Big Picture/Summary" page set out eight separate areas of the inspection, rating each of the eight sections as average, above average or below average, as well as setting out "major points of concern", setting out "significant qualities", and setting out whether "major/minor repairs" were "recommended".
19  The rating for "STRUCTURE" was half-way between "average" and "below", and all of the words "Major/Minor Repairs Recommended" were underlined. The ELECTRIC, PLUMBING, KITCHEN and EXTERIOR are all rated as "Average". The "HEATING/VENTILATION/AC" and the "INTERIOR" were rated as between average and above average. The "UNDER HOUSE SPACE" was also rated as between above average and average. Minor repairs were recommended for the "ELECTRIC" and "minor repairs and maintenance" were "Recommended" for the PLUMBING and ELECTRIC components. Maintenance was recommended for the HEATING/VENTILATION/AC COMPONENT. The "SIGNIFICANT QUALITIES" were noted as being "200 A service", "Newer furnace", and "Well maintained clean interior". The "MAJOR POINTS OF CONCERN" for the "STRUCTURE" were described as follows: "To fix-up structural deficiencies". The comments under the headings "MAJOR POINTS OF CONCERN" and "SIGNIFICANT QUALITIES" were handwritten onto the report form. The next part of the written report dealt with each of the eight components and comprised two pages for each of the eight components.
20  On the first page for the component "STRUCTURE", the following was noted:
21  The only marks or words that were not on the printed form were the question mark after the word "ongoing" and the words "South SW" after the word "Yes". There was a check mark beside the printed words: "check with professional engineering/pest control contractor or _________ for complete information".
22  The printed heading on the next page dealing with STRUCTURE, was: "SIGNIFICANT STRUCTURAL DEFICIENCIES". On this page, there were number of printed "Descriptions". There was a column where a tick mark could be placed to indicate that a particular description applied, a second column to write in the "Location" where the description applied, and two columns to allow tick marks to be added to indicate whether "Repair" or "Upgrade" or both were suggested. The following printed descriptions had tick marks beside them, with the Location, Repair and/or Upgrade columns as noted:
Unstable soil conditions/erosions (location being "S, SW", and "repairs" and "upgrade" ticked);
Solitary foundation movements (location being "S side, deck, SW (?), and "repairs" ticked;
Floor sag (location being SW living rm (bsmt) settled to South", but without "repair" or "upgrade" ticked); and
Wood deck unstable, lateral support missing (with both "repair" and "upgrade" ticked).
23  In addition to those descriptions that were printed on the form, the following additional comments were handwritten in by Mr. Toth:
"Wood decks 6x6 posts have no bracing in any directions, new braces must be added. N side framing (posts and beam) moved, doesn't support the deck any more. Raise the top of beam to support joists."
"SW deck structure solitary foundations have major settlements, post base soil connection structure has no proper connection to house. To lift-up, and reinforce foundation & posts. "
"Two West side timber rafters near foundations are decayed, water damaged. "
"SE corner of garage conc. structure cracked. "
For each of (a), (b) and (c), the "repair" column was ticked but the "upgrade" column was not.
24  The other seven areas of inspection contained somewhat unimportant notations on the two printed pages for each of the seven separate areas of the inspection:
"UNDER HOUSE SPACE" - "mouse droppings in furnace rm." (with the "SIGNIFICANT UNDER HOUSE DEFICIENCIES" being noted as "Occasional seepage possible, to drain backyard!" and "Property grading pooling water against house -- N. side (backyard)", with both noting a suggested "Upgrade");
"ELECTRICAL" with the "SIGNIFICANT ELECTRICAL DEFICIENCIES" notations "Wires/boxes uncovered/loose -- Furnace rm, Exterior E" and "Tree branches/vines interfering with cable", with both noted as requiring "Repair";
"PLUMBING" -- a number of repairs were recommended, but nothing of a particularly significant nature;
"HEATING/VENTILATION/AIR CONDITIONING" (with the only "SIGNIFICANT H/V/AC DEFICIENCIES" being "Fireplace damper warped, not closing -- Family rm");
"KITCHEN" had two matters noted: "Refrigerator handle loose" and "Countertops have swollen joints";
"INTERIOR" was a notation "Mouse droppings in furnace room". There were a number of "SIGNIFICANT INTERIOR DEFICIENCIES" noted but none that bear on the questions between the parties involving this litigation;
"EXTERIOR", the "SIGNIFICANT EXTERIOR DEFICIENCIES" were noted as: "Retaining wall has no weep holes, add new, drill drains in conc. wall along stair", "Finished grading high, lowering 6" below siding required -- NE, E", "Yard has no proper drainage pooling rain water -- N patio area", "Debris to remove from E side", and "50% of garage roof, 100% of N overhang roof, 90% of walkway roof, ponding water, new drainage recommended at low points". Upgrades were recommended for all those "deficiencies".
25  After the first significant rainfall, the Plaintiffs noted leakage from the roof above the area that had been established as a family room. As a result, repairs were made to the roof. The Plaintiffs had discussions with a contractor who provided them with estimates of what it would cost to undertake the repairs of the areas in the report of Mr. Toth that required attention. The Plaintiffs also had William E. Clayton undertake an inspection of the Property.
REPORT OF WILLIAM E. CLAYTON
26  Mr. Clayton went to the Property in mid-December 2006 and undertook a cursory inspection. That involved taking no notes but taking photographs which are in evidence. The photographs taken in December 2006 clearly show well-established rot in a number of the A-frame members. While the written report of Mr. Toth had indicated: "Two West side timber rafters near foundation are decayed, water damaged" and while Mr. Toth did not inspect the structural members on the east side of the A-frame part of the House as he did not attempt to access a room which housed the east side structural members, Mr. Clayton found substantial problems with almost all of the A-frame beams.
27  At Trial, Mr. Clayton was qualified to provide an expert opinion regarding home inspections and the responsibility of home inspectors. His May 13, 2009 opinion was in evidence. In that opinion, he was asked the following questions and provided the following answers:
A-frame Beams
 Q1.  Please advise if there is any material difference in the state of the structure since your inspection of the structure in November or December of 2006." 
 A1.  Since my inspection on 17 December 2006, the rot conditions in all visible portions of the A-frame members appear to have progressed and are more extensive. At the time of my 2006 inspection, the rot appeared to be well established. 
 Q2.  "Please examine the balance of the exposed A-frame rafters on the west side of the house and advise whether or not they are also in need of repair." 
 A2.  I examined all the exposed A-frame members on the west side of the house May 5th and advise that, in my opinion, all of the members, except the first one at the northwest corner, need extensive repairs and replacement of the majority of the exposed exterior portions. 
 Q3.  "Please examine that portion of the structure [the horizontal beam at the south end of the A-frame structure] and advise as whether or not it is need of repair." 
 A3.  I inspected the southernmost beam in the crawlspace. It is in an advanced state of rot. My knife easily penetrated 3" into the members. Water was weeping out of the wood. There were numerous fungal organisms growing on the wood members. In my opinion, these members will need to be replaced as they cannot be repaired. 
 Q4.  "Please describe the state of the A-frame rafter on the East side and advise whether or not they are in need of repair." 
 A4.  Examination of the east side, southernmost A-frame reveals extensive rot immediately above the deck. It appears that an attempt has been made in the past to cover-up the condition or hide the condition - possibly before the last time the house was painted. In my opinion, repairs are required. 
"Once the house inspector determined that two of the rafters were rotten, what steps should the house inspector have taken, what should the house inspector have reported to the client and what recommendations should the house inspector have made to the client."
In my opinion, a prudent inspector in this market place at that time, would have checked the condition of all of the similar structural members and reported the condition in writing and in discussion with the client and would most likely have physically shown the client the condition. A prudent inspector would have recommended that a (structural) engineer, experienced in heavy timber construction be engaged to review the condition and make further recommendations with respect to repair and costs for repairs.
"In order to be consistent with the standards in the industry, what steps would a house inspector take with respect to the inspection of the A-frame rafters on the East side of the A-frame structure, particularly given the fact that he had identified two of the rafters on the West side of the structure as being rotten."
The standards used by Mr. Toth and referred to in his Property Inspection Contract are the Canadian Association of Home and Property Inspectors (CAHPI) Standards of Practice. Those Standards only require that the inspector inspect and probe "... a representative number of structural components where deterioration is suspected or where clear indications of possible deterioration exist."
In spite of the conditions imposed by the Standards, and as explained in A5(a) above, I believe that a prudent inspector would have inspected and reported on all of the A-frame members, not just some of them as required by the Standards.
Stability of House
 Q2.  "Given those observations, in order to be consistent with the standards in the industry, what steps would a house inspector take and what would be reported to the client and recommended to the client? In this regard, please make whatever comments you deem appropriate with respect to the reference in the house inspection report prepared by Mr. Toth to settlement and advise whether or not you believe those comments are consistent with the standards in the industry give the conditions observed." 
 A2.  The CAHPI Standards of Practice require that an inspector report "on those systems and components inspected which, in the professional opinion of the inspector, are significantly deficient or are near the end of their service life." 
In my opinion, the condition of the A-frame members were significantly deficient at the time of the inspection and should have been reported as such. Also in my opinion, the location of the foundations very close to the juncture between the house construction site and the steep slope, regardless of their condition, should have caused a prudent inspector to recommend that his clients consult a geotechnical engineer prior to completing their purchase decision.
In his report Mr. Toth indicates on The Big Picture/Summary page that the structure is below average, and that the MAJOR POINTS OF CONCERN: are "To fix-up structural deficiencies"
Further in the report in the Structure page, Mr. Toth notes 1) Moderate settlement and suggests that it may be ongoing 2) soil erosion a [sic] the south -- SW and 3) a check mark beside "Check with professional Engineer/pest control contractor" but does not specifically indicate the exact concern.
On the Significant Structural Deficiencies page, Mr. Toth indicates that there are "Unstable soil conditions/erosion" at the S, SW which require repair & upgrading and that "solitary foundation movements at the S side dec, SW (?)" need repair, and that "floor sag SW living rm (bsmt) settled to South" without any recommendation;
and that "wood deck unstable, lateral supports missing" and in need of repair and upgrading;
and that "wood deck's 6x6 posts have no bracing in any directions, new braces must be added. N side framing (posts and beam) moved, doesn't support the deck any more. Raise the top of the beam to support joists." Repair needed;
and that "SW deck structure, solitary foundations have major settlements, post bases have soil connections, structure has no proper connection to house. To lift-up and reinforce foundations & posts" Repairs needed;
and that "two West side timber rafters near foundations are decayed, water damaged." Repairs needed.
Mr. Toth has reported many of the structural deficiencies and recommended that his client should "check with professional engineer". In this respect, the report appears to meet the intentions of the Standards of Practice. but, in my opinion, Mr. Toth's report is deficient in as much as it does not make any recommendation to have a geotechnical review of the Property and that the report does not clearly present the significance of the problems observed.
 Q3.  Assuming that Mr. Toth verbally advised that the slope stability Issue or settlement issue related to the supports for the decks on the south side of the A-frame portion of the structure and that the cost of repair would be in the order of <damage type = "other">$15,000</damage>, was Mr. Toth's advice consistent with the standards of the industry. If not, why not? 
 A3.  The Standards of Practice are silent on the provision of repair estimates. 
Mr. Toth's contract states that "4. Cost estimates, if provided are "ball-park" estimates only and are not intended to be relied upon by any person for accuracy. The CLIENT should obtain written bids from qualified licensed contractors in order to determine the possible cost of repairs."
There are no repair costs provided in Mr. Toth's written report, therefore any cost estimates provided must have been verbal. Some inspectors provide order-of-magnitude estimates verbally to their clients, and in this respect, Mr. Toth appears to be consistent with industry practices although the provision of such estimates are beyond the requirements of the Standards of Practice.
If Mr. Toth did provide a repair estimate of <damage type = "other">$15,000</damage>, it would appear to be insufficient, based on the significance of the deteriorated condition of the structure and decks that were evident at the time of his inspection. Given the limited time that Mr. Toth spent on site and the time required to adequately inspect and report on this somewhat complex structure, there was little time available for Mr. Toth to consider and provide a "ball-park" estimate that would be a reasonable reflection of the conditions noted in the house.
28  Mr. Clayton summarized his findings regarding the beams of the House as follows:
DISCUSSION AND CASE AUTHORITIES
29  In order for negligence to be established, the Plaintiffs must establish on a balance of probabilities that the Defendants owed the Plaintiffs a duty of care, the standard of care required of a home inspector, that the Defendants breached the duty of care owed to the Plaintiffs by failing to meet the requisite standard of care, and that the breach of the duty of care caused the Plaintiffs to suffer damages.
30  In order to establish the tort of negligent misrepresentation, it is necessary to prove that there was a duty of care based on a special relationship between the parties, a representation was made by one party to the other, that representation was false, inaccurate or misleading, that misrepresentation was made negligently, the person to whom the representation was made must have reasonably relied on the representation, and the reliance must have been detrimental to that person with the consequence of the person suffering damages: Queen v. Cognos Inc., .
31  The Plaintiffs allege that the Defendants breached their duty of care by failing to inspect all of the A-frame beams for rot and moisture, by failing to fully advise the Plaintiffs regarding the extent of the structural problems relating to the House, by failing to advise the Plaintiffs that a structural engineer should be retained by them, and that Mr. Toth made various statements regarding the cost of correcting the problems that he found, and that the statements amounted to negligent misrepresentation.
32  It is not disputed by the Defendants that the Defendants owed the Plaintiffs a duty to conduct the home inspection and prepare the report in a competent manner. The Defendants submit that this duty was subject to the terms of the Contract which specified that the standard against which their competence would be measured would be the Standards of Practice set out by the Canadian Association of Property and Home Inspectors.
33  CAHPI publishes a Code of Ethics and Standards of Practice ("Standards") for its members. Mr. Toth is a member of CAHPI. Mr. Toth is also a member of the British Columbia Association. The Standards of the national organization includes the following statement: "The Standards are a set of guidelines for home inspectors to following the performance of their inspections. They are the most widely-accepted home inspection guidelines in use, and include all the home's major systems and components."
34  The Standards provide in part:
2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE
2.1 The purpose of these Standards of Practice is to establish a minimum and uniform standard for private, fee-paid home inspectors who are members of one of the provincial/regional organizations of CAHPI. Home inspections performed to these Standards of Practice are intended to provide the client with information regarding the condition of the systems and components of the home as inspected at the time of the Home Inspection.
2.2 The Inspector shall:
A. Inspect:
readily accessible systems and components of homes listed in these Standards of Practice.
installed systems and components of homes listed in these Standards of Practice.
B. report:
on those systems and components inspected which, in the professional opinion of the inspector, are significantly deficient or are near the end of their service lives.
a reason why, if not self-evident, the system or component is significantly deficient or near the end of its service life.
the inspector's recommendations to correct or monitor the reported deficiency.
on any systems and components designated for inspection in these Standards of Practice which were present at the time of the Home Inspection but were not inspected and a reason they were not inspected.
3. STRUCTURAL SYSTEM
3.1 The inspector shall:
A. Inspect:
the structural components including foundation and framing.
by probing a representative number of structural components where deterioration is suspected or where clear indications of possible deterioration exist. Probing is NOT required when probing would damage any finished surface or where no deterioration is visible.
B. describe:
the foundation and report the methods used to inspect the under-floor crawl space.
the floor structure.
the wall structure.
the ceiling structure.
the roof structure and report the methods used to inspect the attic.
3.2 The inspector is NOT required to:
provide any engineering service or architectural service.
B. offer an opinion as to the adequacy of any structural system or component.
4. EXTERIOR
4.1 The inspector shall:
A. Inspect:
the exterior wall covering, flashing and trim.
all exterior doors.
attached decks, balconies, stoops, steps, porches, and their associated railings.
the eaves, soffits, and fascias where accessible from the ground level.
the vegetation, grading, surface drainage, and retaining walls on the property when any of these are likely to adversely affect the building.
walkways, patios, and driveways leading to dwelling entrances.
B. describe the exterior wall covering.
35  While paragraph 5 of the Contract states that the CAHPI "Code of Ethics and Standards of Practice" are attached to the Contract, there is nothing in evidence which would allow me to conclude that this was the case. Accordingly, I cannot conclude that it was agreed between the parties that the inspection would be performed in accordance with the CAHPI "Code of Ethics and Standards of Practice". Even if I am wrong in this regard and, in any event, I am satisfied that the Standards are only guidelines, and that a determination that the inspection had been undertaken in accordance with the Standards would not preclude a finding that the inspection was carried out negligently. In this regard, Mr. Toth at Trial stated:
Standard of Practice sets minimum expectations for the home inspectors, what they have to render during and after the inspection. I believe this is the standard, like the Bible, of every home inspector as a minimum requirement. Some inspectors try to exceed it. Some others never target to exceed it. I feel myself whatever time circumstances exist, I try to go even beyond that.
CLAIM OF THE PLAINTIFFS RELATING TO THE STRUCTURAL MEMBERS
36  The first part of the claim of the Plaintiffs relates to rotten A-beam structural members. The older A-frame portion of the House is supported by horizontal and vertical beams. The Plaintiffs submit that the ends of most of those beams were rotten at the time of the inspection by Mr. Toth, Mr. Toth did not identify all of the rotten horizontal and vertical beams, Mr. Toth did not advise them that he had not inspected all of the horizontal and vertical beams, and Mr. Toth underestimated the cost of repair of the two beams that he did identify as rotten when stating that the cost of repair would be in the neighbourhood of <damage type = "other">$4,000.00</damage>. It is now apparent that the estimated cost of replacing all of the rotten beams is in the neighbourhood of <damage type = "other">$90,000.00</damage>, and that the cost of repairing the two beams that he did identify as rotten is the neighbourhood of <damage type = "other">$35,000.00</damage>.
(a) Beams on the East Side of the House
37  I find that Mr. Toth made no inspection of the vertical beams on the east side of the House. I find that an inspection of two of those beams would have been easily accessible through an unlocked door off the lower balcony. This door led into a room that was otherwise inaccessible from inside the House. I find that even a cursory examination of the two beams in this area would have revealed to Mr. Toth that they were rotten.
38  At his October 17, 2007 Examination for Discovery, Mr. Toth could only state that he could not recall if: "... that room was or was not available for inspection." At Trial, Mr. Toth was asked whether he had tested any of the beams on the east side of the house, and stated: "Unfortunately not ... I cannot exactly recall why ... ever since, it is kind of a mystery for myself. I have no proper explanation why. I just simply don't remember." I accept the evidence that the door to the room could not be locked from the outside so that there was no impediment to Mr. Toth entering the area and discovering that there was considerable rot in two of the east side beams.
39  Under cross-examination, Mr. Toth described the area as a "crawl space" but I find that is not accurate. From the photographs in evidence, it is clear it is just a room off the exterior of the House. As to why he did not attempt to go through the door, Mr. Toth stated under cross-examination:
I make effort to open every solid door, but I cannot easily identify where they lead to, and then I supposed to open that door. I cannot recall which way I find it, closed, which way I find it even sticked to the frame or for any way it's not opening. It appeared not to opening, and that's what I expect, and that's what I -- my statement about. ...
That was a typical door of a house, and that was not marked as a crawl space door, and once I cannot or I appeared couldn't go through, I legitimately expected to be access the same room from the inside, which unfortunately never happened.
If the door is not opening, it's not readily accessible.
... because I don't remember what kind of way I used to push the door, bang the door or tried to gently open. One way or the other, the door didn't open and I didn't go in. It was not readily accessible. ...
If I would be aware that room has no interior connection and that has no other access way, then I would ask -- I would try to make effort.
40  Mr. Toth stated that it was his usual practice to go clockwise when inspecting a house and, regarding any doors that he finds, he would attempt to enter the door:
... I find the doorway which is not clear where it goes, I try to go through or clarify the door, where it goes.
So in our case, we have a solid door on that so-called crawl space, exactly the same looking and full-size door than the door beside of it, or other doors. So I assume, but I cannot hundred percent recall it, that information. I may find it locked or not opening at some point, for any reason not opening, and then I assume there will be another inside room, another room, but I will approach from the inside of the building. Which unfortunately never happened.
41  Even if Mr. Toth concluded that he could not have outside access to what was behind the door, he should have come back to that space when he determined in his later inspection of interior adjacent space that the space could not be accessed from inside the House. At Trial, Mr. Toth confirmed that he did not ask anyone to gain access to this room.
42  I find it was necessary for Mr. Toth to inspect this room and the two east side beams in order to perform his inspection appropriately. Mr. Toth is liable either in negligence or in breach of contract because he did not perform the inspection in accordance with paragraph 1 of the Contract because he did not perform a "VISUAL INSPECTION" of the "readily accessible and visible areas" of the House. At the same time, the Standards relied upon by Mr. Toth also include a requirement that such an inspection take place. If I am wrong in coming to those conclusions, I also find that Mr. Toth was negligent in not drawing to the attention of the Plaintiffs that he had not had an opportunity to inspect the two east side beams because he could not or did not access the space. Pursuant to the agreement reached between the parties, I find that the cost of repairing or replacing east side frame beams is <damage type = "other">$18,800.00</damage>.
(b) Beams on the West Side of the House
43  Regarding the horizontal and vertical beams on the west side of the House, Mr. Toth stated at his October 17, 2007 Examination for Discovery that two members were "... showing not very extensive but visible damages and wood rot", that he "... inspected with a probe all of those [all of the A-frames]", and that "The rest had no wood rot". At his Examination for Discovery, Mr. Toth repeated that he had advised the Plaintiffs that he had inspected all of the beams on the west side of the House when he was asked the following questions and gave the following answers:
 Q  And did you tell them that you'd inspected the other ones on the west side and they appeared to be fine? Did you say that to them? 
 A Yes. 
44  I find this testimony inconsistent with other testimony of Mr. Toth. At his Examination for Discovery and at Trial, Mr. Toth stated that he inspected all of the beams and found only two to have rot. At Trial, Mr. Toth stated it was only his obligation to provide the Plaintiffs with a representative number of deficiencies. In this regard, Mr. Toth stated:
Which means my duty is to give a representative number of deficiencies and explain them, and I believe I did it, even if that could be my best, despite of my best effort, I still missed one or two small location somewhere.
When I inspected it in September 2006, I find I detected wood rot on the two structure piece, and I believed that was sufficient representation of the west side A-frames.
45  At Trial, Mr. Toth stated that he only examined two of the west side beams, as that was the representative sample that was required of him. He was also asked the following question and gave the following answer:
 Q  Once you found the two beams to be rotten, didn't you think that you were going to have to go and take extra steps, unusual steps to make sure that the rest of the beams were sound? Isn't that just common sense, now that you -- you found two that are rotten, wouldn't you -- you be on sort of a high alert to make sure that the rest are -- are sound? 
 A  It was high alert enough and referring to engineering services, that will take care of the rest. 
46  According to the opinion of Mr. Clayton who was called as a witness for the Plaintiffs and who was qualified as an expert to provide an opinion regarding house inspection standards, the Standards set out by CAHPI only require a home inspector to inspect and probe: "... a representative number of structural components where deterioration is suspected, or where clear indications of possible deterioration exist". However, Mr. Clayton also provided the opinion that, despite the standards set by CAHPI, a prudent inspector would have inspected and reported on all of the A-frame members and not just some of them as required by the Standards. I agree. To fail to do so was negligent after Mr. Toth found what he did with the two beams he said he did examine.
47  Mr. Toth gave various excuses as to why it was not possible to examine all of the west side beams. Regarding the horizontal beams, Mr. Toth stated at Trial they were in "quite high". When asked whether or not he had gone up to probe the horizontal beams, Mr. Toth stated: "I just don't remember what part, but that was obvious without probing the wood ... the wood rot". He said that the wood rot on the A6 beam was visible. From the photographs taken by Mr. Clayton, it is clear that the horizontal beams on the two A-frame beams found by Mr. Toth to have rot are quite high off the ground but that the other beams are not. I reject the testimony of Mr. Toth that all of the horizontal beams were high and could not be easily inspected.
48  Mr. Toth stated at Trial that he was not in a position to inspect all of the west side horizontal and vertical beams as some of them were covered with grass so as to make them inaccessible. As to why he did not clear away the grass to make sure that he could thoroughly check the A 4 beam, Mr. Toth stated: "I am not clearing grass." "That's not part of my job." Mr. Toth appears to have forgotten that the Standards provide that an inspector is to inspect "the vegetation ... on the Property when any of these are likely to adversely affect the building".
49  A photograph taken in December 2006 regarding beam A4 indicates a "tiny clump of grass" at the bottom of the beam. At Trial, Mr. Toth was asked whether the grass was "thigh high at the time" he made the inspection, and he stated: "That's my recollection, that's correct." He also stated: "In between that was a clear-out of the whole area." However, the possibility that there had been a clearing of the vegetation in the whole area between the time when Mr. Toth conducted his inspection and December 2006 was not put to the Plaintiffs under cross-examination. Mr. Toth makes no mention of there being high grass in his written report even though the report does note in the "EXTERIOR" section, that: "Debris to remove from E side". As well, it was drawn to the attention of Mr. Toth that his report form contained a provision that he had to draw to the attention of the parties what was not inspected and the reason it was not inspected. Mr. Toth confirmed that he did not do that and did not report to the Plaintiffs that something had not been inspected.
50  Regarding the photographs taken by Mr. Clayton, Mr. Toth testified at Trial that "It's possible" that the rot had occurred between September, 2006 when he inspected that beam and December, 2006 when the photograph was taken: "It's obviously that deteriorated from September to December". At Trial, Mr. Toth stated that the rot which was evident had occurred in the two and a half years since he inspected the Property and, at the time of his inspection, the rot "wasn't there". I have no hesitation in rejecting this testimony. It is inconceivable that the rot that is shown in the photographs taken by Mr. Clayton in December 2006 could have occurred between September and December 2006. Mr. Toth was also incorrect in stating that all of Mr. Clayton's photographs were taken 2-1/2 years after his inspection of the Property. This is simply not the case.
51  I accept the evidence of Mr. Clayton. From the photographs that he took in December 2006 and from his May 13, 2009 opinion, I find that rot was well established on four of the A-frame beams and four of the horizontal beams at the time of the inspection by Mr. Toth. I conclude that the photographs which were taken by Mr. Clayton in December 2006 fairly represent the conditions that would have been found by Mr. Toth on September 21, 2006. In particular, the December 17, 2006 photograph taken by Mr. Clayton does not show any vegetation which would make it impossible for a full inspection of at least four of the horizontal and vertical beams to take place. Mr. Toth owed the plaintiffs a duty to inspect all west side beams after he ascertained that there was rot in two of the beams. I conclude that he did not do so.
52  I also find that Mr. Toth was negligent in not drawing to the attention of the Plaintiffs the extent of the rot in the beams. If he had actually examined all of the beams on the west side of the House, he could not have come to the conclusion that only two of the beams were rotten. If, on the other hand, he only examined two of the beams, he was negligent in not drawing to the attention of the Plaintiffs that he had only examined two of the beams and had not examined the others. I find that the examination of only two of the beams was not in accordance with the obligations that Mr. Toth owed to the Plaintiffs. Mr. Toth was also negligent when he described the "MAJOR POINTS OF CONCERN" for the "STRUCTURE" as being to "fix-up structural deficiencies". This is hardly a sufficient description of what needed to be done to correct the "deficiencies". I find that the use of the word "fix-up" lulled the Plaintiffs into assuming that minor or cosmetic changes could be made in order to meet the "MAJOR POINTS OF CONCERN".
53  I also find Mr. Toth negligent in his failure to advise the Plaintiffs that they should have structural engineers examine the beams. Mr. Toth was asked whether he told the Plaintiffs that they needed engineers to go and probe the rest of the beams and he answered: "no". I accept the opinion of Mr. Clayton that: "A prudent inspector would have recommended that a (structural) engineering, experienced in heavy timber construction, be engaged to review the condition and make further recommendations with respect to repair and costs of repairs." The failure of Mr. Toth to provide this advice to the Plaintiffs amounts to negligence.
54  Regarding the costs of repairing the two rotten west side beams, I accept the evidence of the Plaintiffs that they were provided with a repair estimate in the neighbourhood of <damage type = "other">$4,000.00</damage> by Mr. Toth. By agreement between the parties, the actual cost of replacing the west side beams is <damage type = "other">$35,000.00</damage>.
55  Despite paragraph 4 of the Contract which provides that, if cost estimates are provided, they are "ballpark" estimates only, Mr. Toth was adamant that he would generally never provide such estimates. At Trial, Mr. Toth stated that he gave them a "ballpark rough estimate" but that "I asked him to obtain quotes from contractor, and he should expect somewhere around this ballpark figure for that particular carpentry job." [to repair the two A-frame members]. Mr. Toth stated that he was not expected to give any ballpark figures but, because Mr. Salgado insisted, he did give them a ballpark estimate: "My best honest guess." When asked whether it was normal and a standard practice to provide estimates to clients, Mr. Toth stated: "No", as it was "not the home inspector's job to do. We don't have a enough information for current market conditions."
56  Paragraph 4 of his standard form of contract contemplated that "ballpark" estimates might be provided. Accordingly, I cannot accept his evidence that it was not his normal and standard practice to provide such estimates to clients who requested his advice. I find that the repair estimate of <damage type = "other">$4,000</damage> relating to the west side beams was provided to the Plaintiffs by Mr. Toth. I find that this estimate of <damage type = "other">$4,000</damage> was woefully inaccurate. While I cannot conclude that the Plaintiffs relied upon this estimate provided by Mr. Toth, I do find that the estimate of <damage type = "other">$4,000.00</damage> lulled the Plaintiffs into assuming that the rot was of no particular importance, and that it could be inexpensively corrected.
57  I find that Mr. Toth was negligent in his inspection of the horizontal and vertical beams on both sides of the House. Mr. Toth was negligent in not inspecting the east side beams, and was negligent in his inspection of the west side beams by either inspecting only two and not advising the Plaintiffs that he had only done so or by not drawing to their attention that the rot was much more widespread than he indicated to them. His breaches of duty of care caused the Plaintiffs to suffer damages. But for the negligent act and/or the omission, the damages would not have occurred as the purchase of the Property would not have occurred. I find that the Plaintiffs would not have purchased the Property if the full extent of the rot on the east and west side beams of the House had been known and brought to their attention. In the circumstances, the Plaintiffs are entitled to damages of $35,000.00 plus $18,800.00 less the $4,000.00 estimate provided by Mr. Toth.
CLAIM OF THE PLAINTIFFS RELATING TO THE STABILITY OF THE HOUSE
58  The second part of the claim of the Plaintiffs relates to the stability of the House. The south portion of the House sits on fill that was not properly compacted at the time of construction, the House is being undermined, this settlement results in stress on the structural members of the House, and, in order to stabilize the structure, the geotechnical and structural engineers who have been retained by the Plaintiffs have recommended that extensive remedial work be undertaken. The Plaintiffs submit that Mr. Toth failed to properly warn them of the extent of the problem and that he stated to them that the problem could be dealt with by way of remedial work costing less than <damage type = "other">$16,000.00</damage>, whereas the estimated cost is now in excess of <damage type = "other">$75,000.00</damage>.
59  In his written report, Mr. Toth indicated that the "settlement" was "Moderate" and that it might be "Ongoing" as he had a question mark beside that word on the printed form for the component "STRUCTURE". He also indicated that the rating for "STRUCTURE" was half way between "average" and "below".
60  At his October 17, 2007 Examination for Discovery, Mr. Toth was asked the following questions and gave the following answers:
So just so I can summarize your evidence on this point, the evidence that you saw of either settlement in the past or ongoing settlement was by looking at the cement abutments at the base of the A-frame beams on the west side --
Yes.
-- and by looking at the foundations supporting the deck, that is where the post met the cement footings, correct?
Yes.
And then I think you mentioned earlier in your testimony in the ceiling of the deck or towards -- I think it's over towards where the hot tub is, some of the joists appeared to be -- have pulled away from the roof above?
Yes.
So those were the three aspects of the residence that indicated to you that there was settlement or perhaps ongoing settlement; is that correct?
It's not containing the fourth one which we marked here, the basement floor and associated strip foundation which were noticed and reported to being settled. So that's four different kind of settlements.
Well, or at least symptoms of settlement?
Symptoms, that's correct.
So just so I understand the fourth one, I understand your point about that the floor of the basement in the A-frame has a slope to it which you observed, correct, without measuring the slope?
The A-frame and the basement floor has no connection.
61  At his October 17, 2007 Examination for Discovery, Mr. Toth stated that he did not give: "... any figures as to the possible costs of remedying the perceived problem or potential problem with the settlement aspect of the matter". I find that testimony to be inconsistent with what Mr. Toth stated at Trial when he testified:
So I said I don't know. I don't know how much. And it's not simple to answer this question at all. I could tell them the carpentry work to fix up the deck and fix up the rafter, reported rafter, it would be somewhere in the neighbourhood of [<damage type = "other">$15,000.00</damage> to] <damage type = "other">$20,000.00</damage>, but they should obtain a general contractor or specific contractor to obtain. This is just should be treated as a very ballpark guess. ...
I mentioned to plaintiff the engineer, based on his information, may well specify retaining walls, piling, or any other engineering solution for the problem. And I have no idea how much that would cost, that what kind of work that would be. I mentioned this -- this possibilities, and I gave absolutely no financial -- not even ballpark figure. This mention of [<damage type = "other">$4,000.00</damage> to] <damage type = "other">$5,000.00</damage>, I never heard about that.
62  At the Trial, Mr. Toth stated that he told the Plaintiffs that the "unstable soil conditions/erosions" "... along the whole south line from the east corner to the west corner, and specifically the southwest area turning to the west side, soil erosion and was noted. Soil erosion was noted on all foundation areas." Regarding the check mark beside the statement "settlement moderate", Mr. Toth at Trial stated that he reviewed that with the Plaintiffs and, after he presented what was written in the report, he stated:
... these are those visual clues of structural movements deterioration. I cannot tell in a short visual inspection with my -- my limitation whether this movements are still ongoing or they not ongoing. ...
I did not see any inside or outside major visual clues to tell the sequence how this movement -- this movements developed.
There are no reportable clues. The only thing we can do and they can do a further geotechnical engineering evaluation, because even an engineer cannot tell on a short visual observation if that's ongoing or not ongoing. And I not only told my client, only engineering and geotechnical firm can give the answer, but I also recommended, during that discussion, I would recommend a geotechnical firm who is familiar with North Vancouver geographic area.
63  During his cross-examination at Trial, Mr. Toth was asked whether the Plaintiffs could deduce from the question mark beside whether "settlement" was "Ongoing", that this was a "very, very important piece of advice", and that "this house may settle down this slope". Mr. Toth stated that it was sufficient combined with "the verbal explanation". In response to whether the written part of his report was to contain all of the salient information, Mr. Toth stated that this is why he had checked the need for an engineer and verbally explained: "the geotechnical survey, geotechnical report or examination needed".
64  However, Mr. Toth also made this statement at Trial regarding the checkmark beside "check with professional engineer":
I don't remember if I pointed out the check mark itself. The discussion was not pointing on the check mark. Discussion was pointing what to do. And what to do is included the recommendation what I said. ...
My intent was to check with professional engineer for complete information. I admit I probably was better to cross the pest control word at that time.
65  I accept the opinion of Mr. Clayton that there should have been a recommendation that the Plaintiffs consult a geotechnical engineer prior to deciding whether they would remove the subject clause in the Agreement. In dealing with "STRUCTURE", Mr. Toth indicates that the rating was between "average" and "below", but he does not set out whether the repairs that are recommended by him are either "Major" or "Minor". He only describes the "settlement" as being "Moderate", and he questions whether it is "ongoing". While there is a checkmark beside the printed words "CHECK WITH PROFESSIONAL ENGINEERING/PEST CONTROL CONTRACTOR OR _____ FOR COMPLETE INFORMATION", the specific concern regarding why a professional engineer should be consulted is not set out. As well, it is not clear whether this is only an indication that a "pest control contractor" should be consulted.
66  While Mr. Clayton was of the opinion that the part of the report of Mr. Toth dealing with "STRUCTURE" met the Standards set out by the CAHPI, I also accept the opinion of Mr. Clayton and I find that Mr. Toth was negligent in not recommending a geotechnical review of the Property and by not clearly presenting the significance of the problems observed. I find that Mr. Toth owed the Plaintiffs a duty of care, and that this duty was not met because he did not recommend to the Plaintiffs that they should consult a geotechnical engineer prior to deciding whether to proceed with the purchase of the Property. I have no hesitation in concluding that the Plaintiffs relied upon the advice received from Mr. Toth before deciding whether they would remove the subject clauses contained within the Contract and proceed to purchase the Property. As a result of the reliance of the Plaintiffs on the advice received from Mr. Toth regarding the stability of the House, the Plaintiffs proceeded to purchase the Property and have suffered damages as a result of that purchase. But for the negligence of Mr. Toth, the damages suffered by the Plaintiffs would not have been incurred.
67  I accept the evidence presented on behalf of the Plaintiffs that Mr. Toth gave them a repair estimate of <damage type = "other">$15,000.00</damage> for structural work relating to the stability of the House. That estimate was woefully inadequate. While I find that damages are not available to the Plaintiffs as a result of this negligent misrepresentation of the likely cost of the structural changes that were required in order to provide stability for the House because I cannot come to the conclusion that the Plaintiffs relied on this misrepresentation to their detriment, I find that the estimate that was provided gave considerable solace to the Plaintiffs that the structural expenditures would not be excessive and, therefore, the structural problems were not significant. I find that the Plaintiffs are entitled to the actual cost of the structural changes which are required, including engineering costs, being $56,800.00, $26,269.00, $9,360.00, $24,100.00 and $11,500.00, less the $15,000.00 estimate provided by Mr. Toth.
68  I have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the Plaintiffs relied upon the report received by Mr. Toth to decide whether they would purchase the Property. At his December 16, 2008 Examination for Discovery, Mr. Salgado was asked what expectations he had regarding the inspection that would be performed by Mr. Toth, and he stated: "Well, that he would determine if the subject would be removed." Mr. Salgado was also asked the following questions, and gave the following answers:
So you were looking to him for advice as to whether you should buy or not buy; is that fair to say?
I would think so, yes. ... And then I basically asked him if the house -- if I should go through with the deal; you know, if there was anything that he had noticed that would impede me from buying the house.
Yes. And what did he say?
He said no. ... Then I ask again, and then he said you can go ahead, there's no problem.
Okay. So a moment ago you told me that he simply said no, now you're saying that he said you can go ahead, there's no problem.
A moment ago I told you that I asked him about three times.
69  I find it significant that Mr. Toth was not in a position to deny that the Plaintiffs had asked him whether or not they should proceed to purchase the House. At Trial, Mr. Toth was asked the following question and gave the following answer:
Mr. Toth, did the plaintiffs ask you a question, something to the effect of whether or not they should purchase the house?
I cannot recall.
70  The purpose of obtaining an inspection is to provide a lay purchaser with expert advice about any substantial deficiencies or, as is set out in the Standards, any "significantly deficient" problem relating to systems or components that can be discerned upon a visual inspection - deficiencies of the type or magnitude that reasonably can be expected to have some bearing upon the decision-making process of a purchaser regarding whether they will purchase the property or upon which they will renegotiate the price. An inspector invites reliance by the very nature of the advice that is given. Plainly, if prospective home purchasers did not believe that they could secure meaningful and reliable advice about the home they were considering purchasing, there would be no reason for them to retain an inspector to inspect that home. In the case, reliance is obvious.
EFFECT OF THE LIMITATION OF LIABILITY CLAUSE
71  The Defendants submit that any liability found on the part of the Defendants will be limited by the limitation of liability clauses set out in paragraphs 1, 4, 13 and 16(b) of the Contract. I cannot reach that conclusion.
72  Paragraph 1 of the Contract provides that: "The inspection and report are not intended to reflect on the market value of the Property nor to make any recommendation as to the advisability of purchase." I am satisfied that this part of paragraph 1 does not exclude any liability on behalf of the Defendants. There are no words which attempt to limit liability and, in any event, while it may not have been intended that there be any recommendation regarding the advisability of purchase, the Plaintiffs were entitled to rely on any recommendations as to the advisability of purchase if such recommendations were made. I find that such recommendations were made and relied upon.
73  I find that the Plaintiffs did not read the terms of the Contract prior to Mr. Salgado signing it. I accept the evidence of the Plaintiffs that they felt rushed because of the schedule of Mr. Toth. However, I also find the Plaintiffs were intelligent, university-educated people and that they had entered into contracts previously and knew that placing their signature upon a contract had legal implications. The Defendants submit that, in the absence of fraud or misrepresentations, a person is bound by an agreement signed by them whether or not the person has read its contents and that the failure to read a contract before signing it is not a legally acceptable reason for refusing to be bound by its terms: Fraser Jewellers (1982) Ltd. v. Dominion Electric Protection Co.,  (Ont. C.A.) at paras. 30-31).
74  The Defendants also submit that it was not necessary for them to draw to the attention of the Plaintiffs any onerous terms or to ensure that the Plaintiffs had read and understood those terms and that the only exception is where the circumstances are such that they would realize that the Plaintiffs were not consenting to those terms. In Karoll v. Silver Star Mountain Resorts Ltd.  (B.C.S.C.), McLachlin C.J.S.C., as she then was, stated:
Many factors may be relevant to whether the duty to take reasonable steps to advise of an exclusion clause or waiver arises. The effect of the exclusion clause in relation to the nature of the contract is important because if it runs contrary to the party's normal expectations it is fair to assume that he does not intend to be bound by the term. The length and format of the contract and the time available for reading and understanding it also bear on whether a reasonable person should know that the other party did not in fact intend to sign what he was signing. This list is not exhaustive. Other considerations may be important, depending on the facts of the particular case.
(at p. 166)
75  Here, the Plaintiffs were given little time to read the Contract and understand what the Defendants intended to be the effect of the Contract. As well, the primary purpose of the meeting between Mr. Toth and the Plaintiffs was to advise them regarding the results of this inspection. I find that very little time was available for the Plaintiffs to read and understand what was in the Contract. By the very nature of the relationship, the ability to rely on what was being said was critical and, if there was any suggestion that the Plaintiffs could not rely upon what was being said by Mr. Toth and what was set out in his report, I find that Mr. Salgado would not have signed the Contract. In the circumstances, it was incumbent upon Mr. Toth to draw to the attention of Mr. Salgado the exclusion and waiver clauses and to take reasonable steps to apprise Mr. Salgado of the onerous terms and to ensure that he read and understood them.
76  As well, exclusion clauses must be drafted with complete clarity and the principle of contra proferentum should be applied. In Bauer v. Bank of Montreal  (S.C.C.), McIntyre J., on behalf of the Court, stated:
In construing such a clause, the Court shall see that the clause is expressed clearly and that it is limited in its effect to the narrow meaning of the words employed and it must clearly cover the exact circumstances which have arisen in order to afford protection to the party claiming benefit. It is generally to be construed against the party benefiting from the exemption and this is particularly true where the clause is found in a standard printed form of contract, frequently termed a contract of adhesion, which is presented by one party to the other as the basis of their transaction. (at p. 428)
77  In reviewing the "Property Inspection Contract", it must be noted that the Contract is separate from the 17-page Report which starts with the heading "The Big Picture/Summary". There is nothing in the Contract which incorporates the subsequent reporting pages into the Contract. Regarding paragraph 16(b) of the Contract, there are no "representations or warranties" in the Contract. While it may have been the intent of paragraph 16(b) to exclude representations or warranties that arose outside the Contract, it could not have been in the contemplation of the parties that a reference to a document containing no representations or warranties would exclude representations or warranties that were made to induce the Plaintiffs to enter into the Contract or which were contained in the oral or written report subsequently provided by Mr. Toth.
78  Under the Contract, the "Inspector" is defined as being "659279 B.C. Ltd. dba HomePro Inspections". Accordingly, I am satisfied that the attempt to limit liability by paragraph 13 of the Contract relates only to the "Inspector" and not to Mr. Toth personally. It was Mr. Toth who was the inspector. It is Mr. Toth who is the member of the CAHPI (B.C.). In this regard, the cover page indicates "This report prepared by: Imre Toth, B.Arch., RHI, Member of the Canadian Association of Home and Property Inspectors (B.C.)." I am satisfied that the ambiguity regarding whether the provisions of paragraph 13 of the Contract were also to apply to any failure by Mr. Toth to perform any obligations should be resolved against Mr. Toth in favour of a reasonable and fair interpretation.
79  Regarding paragraph 9 of the Contract, it is important to note that it purports to exclude any "GUARANTEE OR WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED" RELATING TO: ... THE FUTURE ADEQUACY, PERFORMANCE OR CONDITION OF ANY INSPECTED STRUCTURE, ITEM OR SYSTEM." (bold type and capitalization in the original). I find that paragraph 9 is not broad enough to exclude a "guarantee or warranty, express or implied" regarding the present adequacy, performance or condition of any inspected structure, item or system. That is the very nature of the inspection that was undertaken. Again, I am satisfied that the doctrine of contra proferentum applies and that any "guarantee or warranty, express or implied" relate to the adequacy, performance or condition of any inspected structure, item or system at the time of the inspection would not be excluded by paragraph 9. While I make no findings that Mr. Toth guaranteed or warranted anything to the Plaintiffs, I make this finding regarding this paragraph of the Contract in the context of the consistent failure to exclude liability.
80  I find that the Defendants are not in a position to rely on paragraphs 1, 9, 13 and 16 of the Contract to exclude liability for the damages which I find were suffered by the Plaintiffs as a result of the oral and written report provided by Mr. Toth.
SHOULD THERE BE APPORTIONMENT?
81  The Defendants submit that, if the Court finds liability on the part of the Defendants, this liability should be apportioned between them and the former Defendants, Mr. and Ms. Shannon. In the Statement of Claim, the Plaintiffs alleged that the Shannons made negligent representations, including that "the residence was a solid house" and "the settlement observed by the Plaintiffs had been there forever, and was not ongoing". It is submitted by the Defendants that, if the Plaintiffs reasonably relied upon any representations, it must be that they relied upon those of Mr. and Ms. Shannon, and liability should be apportioned. The Defendants submit that, as there is no apparent means to determine the apportionment, a 50-50 apportionment between the Defendants and Mr. and Ms. Shannon is mandated by the Negligence Act.
82  There is nothing before me which would allow me to conclude that the Plaintiffs relied upon any representations made by Mr. and Ms. Shannon prior to the Plaintiffs entering into the September 15, 2006 Agreement. Rather, I am satisfied that the Plaintiffs relied only on the statements made by Mr. Toth in his oral and written report. The Plaintiffs relied on what was provided by Mr. Toth and arranged for his inspection in order to have a neutral party provide them with an assessment of the Property and the House. I reject the argument that there should be an apportionment between the Defendants and Mr. and Ms. Shannon of the damages that I find payable by the Defendants.
CONCLUSION
83  The Plaintiffs will be entitled to Judgment against the Defendants in the amount of <damage type = "total">$192,920.45</damage>. As the parties advise that the provisions of Rule 37(b) of the Rules of Court apply, the parties will be at liberty to speak to the question of costs in due course.
G.D. BURNYEAT J.
End of Document
Gray v. Fraser Health Authority (c.o.b. Ridge Meadows Hospital), [2009] B.C.J. No. 372
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
New Westminster, British Columbia
Vancouver, British Columbia
S.K. Ballance J.
Heard: May 12-16 and July 18, 2008.
Judgment: March 2, 2009.
Docket: S94880
Registry: New Westminster
[2009] B.C.J. No. 372   |   2009 BCSC 269   |   176 A.C.W.S. (3d) 133
Between Laurie Darlene Gray, Plaintiff, and Fraser Health Authority, carrying on business as the Ridge Meadows Hospital, Defendant
(151 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Arm injuries — Wrist — Hand — Nerve damage — Considerations impacting on award — Degree of impairment — Temporary total or partial disability — Mitigation — Action for damages against the defendant health authority suffered by the plaintiff for injuries sustained from a negligently-administered injection, allowed — Liability was admitted — Plaintiff suffered the loss of her left arm from nerve damage that resulted from the injection — She recovered most of the use of her arm and returned to work but she continued to suffer symptoms from the overuse of her arm and her future earning ability was impaired — Her non-pecuniary damages were assessed at <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$80,000</damage> — Past income loss was assessed at <damage type = "past wage loss">$60,000</damage> — Plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$160,000</damage> for the loss of her future earning capacity and an additional <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$9,000</damage> for compensation for the negative effects on her pension — Award of $8,000 was made for future care costs for physiotherapy and massage therapy to deal with her overuse symptoms.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Calculation — Considerations — Duration of loss — Employment status — Extent of incapacity — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Retroactive loss of income — Non-pecuniary loss — Action for damages against the defendant health authority suffered by the plaintiff for injuries sustained from a negligently-administered injection, allowed — Liability was admitted — Plaintiff suffered the loss of her left arm from nerve damage that resulted from the injection — She recovered most of the use of her arm and returned to work but she continued to suffer symptoms from the overuse of her arm and her future earning ability was impaired — Her non-pecuniary damages were assessed at <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$80,000</damage> — Past income loss was assessed at <damage type = "past wage loss">$60,000</damage> — Plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$160,000</damage> for the loss of her future earning capacity and an additional <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$9,000</damage> for compensation for the negative effects on her pension — Award of <damage type = "future care">$8,000</damage> was made for future care costs for physiotherapy and massage therapy to deal with her overuse symptoms.
Action by Gray against the defendant Fraser Health Authority for damages for negligence. In January 2005 Gray suffered injuries from an improperly administered intramuscular injection of gravol and Demerol into her left upper arm at a hospital operated by the Authority. The Authority conceded that the injection was given negligently. At the time Gray received the injection she was an industrious and active 39-year old woman who led a full and enjoyable life. She was employed as a community home care nurse in a permanent part-time position and she worked 70 per cent of a full-time position. The injection was given to Gray as an analgesic to make her trip home more comfortable after she was being discharged upon the successful completion of surgery. The nurse who administered the injection did not use any of the usual mapping techniques to properly locate the site before she gave the injection. Immediately, Gray's left forearm and hand became numb and her wrist went limp. She could not move her fingers. By the following day her symptoms did not abate. A neurologist who examined her concluded that her left radial nerve was damaged and he diagnosed her with left radial nerve palsy caused by the injection. The neurologist formed the view that the injection had been given below the safe injection site of Gray's upper left arm. He had no course of treatment to recommend and did not hold out much hope for recovery. There were now many things that Gray could not do in her household. She and her husband separated as he could not handle her inability to perform many of the chores he was accustomed to her doing. The new division of labour and their tighter financial circumstances ended the already strained marriage. Gray gradually experienced improvement in her arm and by April 2006 her neurologist found she demonstrated normal power and sensation in that arm. In June 2006 she returned to work after an absence of 17 months. There were, however, limitations on her ability to use her left arm and she continued to suffer pain and discomfort. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 Gray suffered intermittent symptoms of pain, global achiness and heaviness in her upper left limb since her return to work. These were triggered by the overuse of her arm when she took on extra work shifts. If Gray had not received the injection she would not have experienced the overuse symptoms. Because her residual weakness was permanent Gray's chronic condition would not likely change or improve by any remarkable measure. Gray experienced a miraculous recovery but it was not a full recovery for she was left with weakness in her left arm. She did not fail to mitigate her damages. Her non-pecuniary damages were assessed at <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$80,000</damage>. Her past income loss was assessed at <damage type = "past wage loss">$60,000</damage>. Until her retirement Gray would be able to work more than 70 per cent of full-time but less than 100 per cent without triggering her overuse symptoms. The evidence indicated that Gray suffered an impairment of future earning capacity and that it would likely harm her future earning ability. Gray was awarded <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$160,000</damage> for the loss of her future earning capacity and an additional <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$9,000</damage> for compensation for the negative effects on her pension. An award of <damage type = "future care">$8,000</damage> was made for future care costs for physiotherapy and massage therapy to deal with her overuse symptoms. No award was made for her claim for assistance with housework and home maintenance activities,
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: Judy Voss.
Counsel for the Defendant: Robin Harper andrew Pilliar.
Reasons for Judgment
S.K. BALLANCE J.
I. INTRODUCTION
1  This trial concerns the effects upon the plaintiff, Laurie Gray, of an improperly administered intramuscular injection of gravol and demerol into her left upper arm (the "Injection"), and the damages to which she is entitled.
2  The defendant concedes that the Injection was given negligently on January 24, 2005, by a nurse at the Ridge Meadows Hospital (the "Hospital").
II. BACKGROUND 
(a) Ms. Gray
3  At the time that Ms. Gray received the misplaced Injection, she was an industrious and active 39 year old woman leading a full and enjoyable life. She resided with her husband and two children on their 2.5 acre hobby farm in Coombs on Vancouver Island. Ms. Gray had obtained her bachelor's degree in nursing as a mature student after her children were both in school. At the time of the incident, she was employed as a community home care nurse by the Vancouver Island Health Authority ("VIHA") in a permanent part-time position, working the equivalent of 70% of a full-time position. She had worked in that 0.7 position since 2002.
4  As a community home care nurse, Ms. Gray is responsible for patient care in a fixed geographic area on Vancouver Island. Her work consists of a considerable amount of palliative care, chronic disease maintenance and wound care, involving the use of tweezers, cutting and suturing. She drives herself to each patient's home to provide the requisite nursing care. Ms. Gray carries a tote bag containing her patients' charts and a separate bag with her medical supplies. They are not very heavy. Some part of her day, up to two hours, routinely centres on planning and office work.
5  Prior to the Injection, Ms. Gray pursued many leisure and domestic interests and carried out numerous daily chores. The heat source for the family log home was wood. Practically daily, Ms. Gray and members of her family chopped and stacked wood to fuel the stove. She was also primarily responsible for the majority of the other outside chores, including raising wild birds for food and tending to the family's many pets. Gardening and cooking are particular passions. She cultivated an expansive garden area with fruit trees and maintained a large greenhouse where she grew vegetables and flowers. She gathered, dried, and preserved fruit. She also regularly hosted large gatherings of family and friends in her home, preparing and serving elaborate meals for her guests.
6  During the winter months, Ms. Gray focused her energies on indoor pursuits, especially crafts, such as weaving baskets and crocheting. She made leather moccasins and adorned them with beads.
7  For his part, Ms. Gray's husband concentrated mostly on maintaining their boat and fleet of other recreational vehicles.
8  Ms. Gray kept physically fit through a variety of recreational activities. She enjoyed water skiing, boating, riding dirt bikes and quad-bikes through bushy forests and uneven terrain, jet skiing, kayaking, extreme camping and hiking and tennis. She had been a competitive swimmer as a youngster; and as an adult would periodically swim fifty laps or so for enjoyment and exercise. Ms. Gray is predominantly right-handed but performs certain activities with her left hand, such as tennis and playing pool.
(b) The Injection and its Aftermath
9  Ms. Gray grew up in the Maple Ridge area of the lower mainland. Several members of her family continue to reside there. For many years, she has routinely travelled to Maple Ridge to visit her widowed mother. While on a planned trip to see her mother in January 2005, Ms. Gray required an urgent abdominal hysterectomy. That procedure was performed at the Hospital successfully and without complications.
10  On January 24, 2005, in anticipation of her discharge from the Hospital, Ms. Gray's self-administering morphine pump was discontinued. A nurse offered to inject her with an analgesic to make the trip home more comfortable. Ms. Gray assumed that the nurse would inject the needle into the large muscle area of her buttock, so she began to lower her slacks. However, with virtually no warning, the nurse administered the Injection in the triceps region of Ms. Gray's upper left arm. The nurse did not use any of the usual mapping techniques to properly locate the site prior to giving the Injection.
11  The ill-effects were immediate. Ms. Gray experienced electrical, jolt-like sensations down her left arm to the tips of her fingers. Her left forearm and hand became entirely numb, and her wrist went limp. She could not move her fingers.
12  Later that day, Ms. Gray's sister-in-law telephoned the Hospital and spoke to the nurse who had given the Injection. The nurse assured her that she would call a pharmacist and telephone back, but she did not do so. Ms. Gray took it upon herself to contact a pharmacist at a local drug store, who advised that she ought to wait twenty-four hours before seeking medical attention to see whether her symptoms would resolve. Although Ms. Gray was concerned, she was also hopeful that her adverse reaction to the Injection was merely temporary. She had never before experienced any physical or medical difficulties with her left arm, wrist, or hand.
13  Ms. Gray says that she knew she was in trouble the following day because her symptoms had not abated. She was devastated and shocked. She feared that her lack of sensation and paralysis could be long term. Ms. Gray consulted her mother's doctor, who made an immediate referral to Dr. Tessler, a neurologist.
14  Dr. Tessler first examined Ms. Gray on January 28, 2005. His motor examination showed that her left triceps muscle was intact, but that her brachioradialis muscle, which pulls the arm up, and the extensor muscles of her left fingers were weak. She had a wrist drop with no ability to lift her left hand. Sensory examination revealed numbness over the dorsal (back) side of her left forearm and on the first web space between her thumb and index finger on the back of her left hand.
15  Dr. Tessler concluded that Ms. Gray's sensory and motor abnormalities indicated that her left radial nerve had been injured. He diagnosed left radial nerve palsy caused by the Injection. Dr. Tessler formed the view that the Injection had been given well below the safe injection site of Ms. Gray's left upper arm. He explained that the motor component of the radial nerve extends to the back of the wrist to extend and straighten the fingers and the wrist. In order for the mechanical grip to be strong, it must be accompanied by the wrist remaining in a straight or extended position. The weakness of Ms. Gray's muscles that extend her left wrist resulted in her wrist drop. With her hand in that position, Ms. Gray had very limited movement or control of her fingers.
16  Explaining the situation to Ms. Gray in layperson's terms, Dr. Tessler stated that the needle used in the Injection had either severed or blown-up her left radial nerve. He had no course of treatment to recommend, other than to suggest that she splint her wrist and rest her arm. He told her that he did not hold out much hope for recovery. His plan was to wait to see whether her radial nerve might repair on its own.
17  When Ms. Gray returned home to Vancouver Island, she consulted Dr. Maccari. He has been her family physician for approximately fifteen years. During his initial examination, he observed that Ms. Gray's left wrist drop prevented her from lifting her hand or fingers. Dr. Maccari also noted that she had virtually no active extension of her left wrist and fingers. The reduction in sensation of her left arm was significant; it approached total anaesthesia in the left hand in the sensory distribution of the left radial nerve. He concurred with Dr. Tessler's diagnosis of a left radial nerve injury. Dr. Maccari had no specific treatment recommendation other than to endorse Dr. Tessler's advice that Ms. Gray use splints to immobilize and rest her arm.
18  In fairly short order, Ms. Gray attended a physiotherapist who was unable to offer treatment unless she recovered some motor functioning. She also saw an occupational therapist who made customized splints for her left hand and left wrist. The splints were intended to serve several purposes. One splint lifted Ms. Gray's wrist in order to place her hand in a functional position to allow some movement of her fingers; another splint placed her wrist and hand in an anatomically correct position for resting. Collectively, the splints also prevented a further stretching or deformity of the radial nerve. Ms. Gray consulted a plastic reconstructive and hand surgeon who advised her that surgical treatment was not an option. She tried acupuncture and was given massages to her left arm and hand from friends and family.
19  Ms. Gray's immobilized left arm triggered an unwelcome and dramatic transformation at the Gray family home. According to Ms. Gray, "everything changed" because there were so many things that she could no longer do. She struggled with the most basic everyday activities, like dressing, personal care, and grooming. She could not even braid her hair or put in her contact lenses. Although the splints provided some degree of assistance, they were by no means able to restore full functioning of her left forearm, wrist, hand, or fingers.
20  Of necessity, Ms. Gray developed ways to perform certain tasks using only her right arm. She resorted to making much simpler meals which she could prepare by using mainly her right arm and hand. She needed and received daily personal assistance from her family, especially from her daughter. Friends also pitched in on occasion. They helped mow the lawn, clean her home, and cut, carry and stockpile the wood for the main stove.
21  Ms. Gray drives a vehicle with a stick-shift. She testified that after the Injection, she was not able to drive until she became comfortable with her splints. That took at least four months. Even then, she would typically use her knee to hold the steering wheel in place while she shifted gears with her right hand.
22  There is no dispute that by March 7, 2005, Ms. Gray was fully recovered from her hysterectomy but that her left radial nerve injury stemming from the misplaced Injection prevented her from returning to work at that time. Coincidentally, by that date, she had depleted all of her available sick leave. She, therefore, had to rely on employment insurance benefits until her entitlement to long term disability crystalized. As between she and her husband, Ms. Gray had been the larger income earner. Her reduced income caused the family a degree of financial hardship.
23  Ms. Gray's daughter, Sierra Gray, was an impressive witness. She presented her evidence in an articulate and thoughtful manner. I found her to be credible and reliable. I accept her testimony without reservation.
24  Sierra Gray spoke about her mother's significant contribution to running the family household and maintaining the Coombs property prior to the Injection, and the severe curtailment of her contribution afterwards. She likewise supported her mother's evidence concerning the profoundly negative impact the left arm injury had on Ms. Gray's recreational and domestic pursuits and her day-to-day living. Sierra Gray also credibly recalled that her mother was adversely affected emotionally. She testified that although her mother tried to suppress how she felt, it was clear that her spirits had become very low in trying to cope with her injury and the life changes flowing from it.
25  Sierra Gray not only assumed more of the domestic chores previously done by her mother, she also assisted her mother with daily personal care tasks of the most basic kind. She would often massage her mother's hand in the hope of improving circulation; later, as sensation returned, she performed massage in an attempt to offer temporary pain relief.
26  Around April 2005, Sierra Gray became pregnant. She moved from the family home to rental accommodation with her boyfriend. She made a conscious decision to live only five minutes away from the family home in order to be in close proximity to her mother and readily available to continue to assist her. She visited her mother every day during this time.
27  When Ms. Gray saw Dr. Maccari on May 13, 2005, she complained about the onset of a new ache and pain in her left wrist. He suspected tendonitis, the inflammation of one or more tendons which are the connective tissue that link muscle to bone. Dr. Maccari sent Ms. Gray for an X-ray of her left wrist to rule out an injury to the bone. The X-ray showed no acute boney injury, which, in Dr. Maccari's opinion, confirmed his diagnosis of tendonitis in her left wrist.
28  At a subsequent appointment on June 16, 2005, Dr. Maccari recorded apparent muscle atrophy (wasting) of Ms. Gray's left forearm. Around that time, he also completed the physician portion of a form submitted in support of Ms. Gray's application for CPP benefits on which he reported two diagnoses:
iatrogenic left radial nerve palsy; and
tendonitis left extensor wrist/distal forearm.
On the form, Dr. Maccari also reported that Ms. Gray was unable to perform any activity involving the use of her left hand. He further wrote that her prognosis was very guarded and that it was very unlikely that she would recover extension hand and wrist motion to any significant degree.
29  Ms. Gray's condition remained unchanged for a period of approximately five months after the Injection. After that time, she began to experience fleeting sensations of sharp pain in her left forearm. Despite the discomfort, Ms. Gray was excited by the prospect that the sensation in her arm was returning. At this stage, she still had no functioning of her left wrist or hand.
30  Dr. Tessler sent Ms. Gray for nerve conduction testing and an electro-myographic study on August 17, 2005. Some evidence of reinnervation of the tested muscles was detected, giving Ms. Gray increased hope for recovery.
31  On September 15, 2005, Ms. Gray reported to Dr. Maccari a mild improvement in her active left finger and wrist extension, as well as the pincer strength of her left hand. Dr. Maccari observed these positive changes on his examination.
32  During the ensuing months between September 2005 and April 2006, Ms. Gray's left arm sensory and motor deficits gradually improved. In his records for February 10, 2006, Dr. Maccari noted an objective finding of slightly decreased left grip strength. He reported that finding, among others, on a form submitted to Ms. Gray's disability insurer. Ms. Gray also described to him an internal cramping pain along her left arm as her left radial nerve regenerated. Over time, she began to detect increased mobility in her fingers and noticed that her reliance on her splints was decreasing.
33  As her motor functioning slowly returned, Ms. Gray became increasingly able to attend to her personal care. Even so, her recreational and leisure activities continued to be extremely limited as compared to before the Injection. She could not engage in intense activities or gardening and was not able to hold anything of significant weight. She avoided participation in most of the sports and recreational pursuits that she had formerly enjoyed for fear that she would fall on her left arm and cause additional damage. She tried kayaking once but found that she lacked the necessary strength in her left arm to paddle through an eddy. She felt it would be unsafe to try again because she was concerned that she would not be able to correct herself if the kayak tipped over. On one occasion, Ms. Gray tripped over her suitcase and noticed that her left arm reaction was too slow to protect her fall.
34  When Dr. Tessler saw Ms. Gray on April 4, 2006, he found that she was demonstrating normal power and sensation of her left arm. He told her that she could return to work. At that time, he did not anticipate any late or delayed complications to arise in the future.
35  According to Ms. Gray, she was still experiencing occasional clumsiness of her left hand with fine motor activity. She also says that although her left grip had returned, it often felt weak. Dr. Maccari concluded that as of Ms. Gray's visit on April 28, 2006, her left forearm and hand demonstrated virtually normal strength and sensation. He testified that despite the recovery of her left radial nerve, because Ms. Gray was still exhibiting some mild functional impairment, he was against her returning to her work duties in April 2006. Accordingly, Dr. Maccari recommended that Ms. Gray convalesce a short time longer before returning to work. She followed his advice. It was reasonable for her to do so.
36  In early to mid-June 2006, Ms. Gray participated in a short return to work program. She returned to her permanent part-time position effective June 21, 2006. By then, she had been absent from work for about seventeen months; all but the initial six weeks of that missed time was due solely to the disabling and generally adverse effects of the Injection.
37  During Ms. Gray's absence from work, a number of changes took place in her personal life. In October 2005, she welcomed the arrival of her first grandchild. Approximately one month later, she separated from her husband. Ms. Gray does not blame the aftermath of the Injection for her separation per se. However, there is a connection in the sense that her husband was not able to cope with the reality that his formerly vigorous wife was unable to perform the many chores that he was accustomed to, such as the preparation of elaborate meals, gardening, preserving food, tending the pets and wild birds, cutting and stacking firewood, cleaning the house and chauffeuring the children. The new division of labour in the family and their tighter financial circumstances brought an end to Ms. Gray's already strained marriage.
38  Mr. and Ms. Gray's principal asset of value was the Coombs acreage, which was heavily mortgaged. It was ultimately sold in April 2006, leaving negligible equity. In May 2006, Ms. Gray moved into her current rental home in Nanoose. It is a modest two bedroom cottage with two small patches of grass. Ms. Gray's children and her grandson accompanied her. Sierra Gray and her son remained living there until October or November 2007. Since then, Sierra Gray has lived close by but has no current plans to resume residing with her mother.
39  Sierra Gray testified about her mother's financial pressures brought on by her marital separation and her reduced employment income. At one point, she loaned her mother the sum of <damage type = "other">$3,000</damage>, which her mother has repaid, in part, by babysitting her grandson.
(c) Ms. Gray's Return to Work
40  Ms. Ann Gavey has been the clinical leader for home and community care in Parksville and the surrounding areas since February 2006. She is Ms. Gray's direct supervisor at VIHA. She described Ms. Gray's competency as a nurse in very favourable terms. Ms. Gavey explained that Ms. Gray "owns" her 0.7 permanent part-time position which requires 50.4 hours of work bi-weekly. A full-time position involves 72 hours bi-weekly.
41  Ms. Gavey testified that it is open to Ms. Gray to pick up extra shifts beyond the 0.7 work allotment that she owns. The evidence is clear that certain additional shifts, such as those worked on statutory holidays, weekends and evenings are paid at a premium. For financial reasons, Ms. Gray has often taken on extra shifts over and above her dedicated 0.7 allotment since returning to work in the summer of 2006.
42  Although Ms. Gray experienced even further improvement in her left arm and hand after she returned to work, she maintains that she has been aware of a persistent lingering feeling of "something" in her left arm. She says that when she overuses her left arm, hand or wrist, she very often pays a price. She claims that increasing her work shifts in excess of her permanent part-time allotment frequently results in a strain or overuse of her left arm, wrist and/or hand. This, in turn, causes left arm, wrist and/or hand symptoms of discomfort, pain and a global achiness and heaviness. Ms. Gray testified that there have been instances where her left arm overuse symptoms have prevented her from taking an extra shift or finishing a shift at work. In the latter instances, she has taken the missed time as vacation or drawn on her sick leave, if available. She recalled times when her sick leave bank was depleted and she therefore treated her work absence as an unpaid leave.
43  Ms. Gray also testified that certain non-work activities can give rise to her left arm, hand or wrist overuse symptoms of pain and discomfort. She described lifting and carrying her growing grandson as a movement that has become increasingly aggravating. He is now a toddler and in order to pick him up, she has to position him on a chair or kneel down to collect him.
44  Ms. Gray claims that she has learned to pace herself as best she can at work and outside of work in order to maximize her symptom-free functioning. She has modified how she performs certain tasks in order to accommodate, to the extent she practically can, the limitations that flow from her susceptibility to overuse strain. Even so, she finds that the actions of daily life place an unavoidable strain on her left arm, especially when she has worked extra shifts. She testified that even today, she finds driving her standard vehicle a physical challenge that, on occasion, can strain her left arm.
45  According to Ms. Gray, she has routinely suffered from these overuse symptoms since her return to work and they persist today.
46  My overall assessment of Dr. Maccari's evidence is that it supports Ms. Gray's complaints of overuse symptoms. He reports that she has experienced intermittent difficulties stemming from the overuse of her left upper limb with a variable degree of left arm, hand and wrist aches and pains.
47  Approximately two-and-a-half months after her return to work, Ms. Gray reported to Dr. Maccari that she was experiencing symptoms of pain, achiness and heaviness triggered by overuse at work of her left arm, wrist and/or hand. Her complaints accorded with Dr. Maccari's evaluation of her condition at that time. She voiced similar complaints when she next saw Dr. Maccari on September 21, 2006. On examination, he found tenderness of her left lateral epicondyle, her left forearm extensor muscles, her trapezius and her neck base. He assessed myofascial connective symptoms in her left arm due to left upper limb overuse. That is a soft tissue injury. VIHA's payroll records indicate that during the last week of August and the first two weeks of September 2006, Ms. Gray had picked up several additional hours of work.
48  Ms. Gray's overuse symptoms had improved somewhat when she was next seen by Dr. Maccari on October 16, 2006. Notably, she had reduced her work hours in mid-October. During her appointment with Dr. Maccari on November 16, 2006, she reported that she was working about 75% of full-time and that her left arm, elbow and hand felt "ok with this". She also described her left grip strength at that time as being "ok".
49  Dr. Maccari next examined Ms. Gray on April 5, 2007. She indicated that she had recently been working full-time hours with increased pain. He found mild tenderness of her left forearm extensor muscles, the extensor surface of her left wrist and the left lateral epicondyle near her elbow. Dr. Maccari diagnosed his findings as left lateral epicondylitis, commonly known as tennis elbow, left forearm extensor muscle strain (strain of the muscles responsible for the extension of the hand and wrist), and left wrist extensor tendonitis. He also noted a small amount of residual weakness in Ms. Gray's left forearm and wrist from overuse. He clarified that these diagnoses were not present before the Injection in January 2005.
50  Ms. Gray once again complained of overuse strain when she saw Dr. Maccari on May 25, 2007. She testified that she had been absent from work for two days on account of her overuse symptoms. On examination, Dr. Maccari did not find tenderness at her left wrist or the back of her forearm. However, rapid flexion/extension of her fingers produced an ache at her left radial wrist area. Dr. Maccari observed that a forced extension of her upper arm caused an ache in her left triceps. His assessment at that visit was inflammation of the left triceps area. In cross-examination, Dr. Maccari agreed that Ms. Gray's triceps had been spared from direct injury as a result of the Injection. However, he went on to explain that in his opinion, if an individual's lower arm has weakness, the triceps can become overused as a means of compensating for such weakness, which can lead to soft tissue problems.
51  Dr. Maccari explained that due to the pressing time constraints of his busy practice, he would not have necessarily recorded all of Ms. Gray's ongoing soft tissue symptoms on every visit.
52  Dr. Maccari was aware that Ms. Gray's workload fluctuated. He knew that at times she worked her dedicated part-time hours or less, and at other times picked up extra shifts which, at times, resulted in her working the equivalent of full-time, or close to it. He testified that during some of Ms. Gray's visits, he raised the prospect of her reducing her work hours and number of shifts. He did so out of a concern for her medical fitness to work increased shifts which approached a full-time pace. His recollection was that Ms. Gray would typically acknowledge the legitimacy of his expressed concerns, but she would explain that she had to work as much as possible for financial reasons.
53  In early 2008, Ms. Gray was given an employment opportunity to become the community nurse manager in the remote northern community of Klemtu. I accept that she had always been interested in working as an outpost nurse. It was a part-time position that she had in mind she would assume in conjunction with her part-time employment at VIHA. She was not certain exactly how time consuming the Klemtu posting would prove to be. She testified that she would have liked to work there about seven days of each month, although she acknowledged that the frequency may have tapered off based on the needs of the community. Ms. Gray arranged to take an unpaid leave of absence from VIHA to explore the Klemtu opportunity. She believed that she could handle the position physically because she had experienced a relatively "good run" coping with her symptoms in the six to seven months before the offer.
54  Ms. Gray's first visit to Klemtu spanned four days in January 2008; it was largely administrative in nature. She returned in February 2008 for another trial period of seven days. She worked long hours for seven days straight, performing a multitude of tasks expected of an outpost community nurse, such as wound care, chronic ailment management, medical specialist liaising, patient charting, and office work. Ms. Gray testified that the physical demands of that week took a significant toll on her left arm. She experienced increased pain and some left arm weakness. She took off four scheduled shifts from her regular job at VIHA in order to recuperate. It was clear to Ms. Gray that her left arm could not cope with the demands of the Klemtu position. In March 2008, she briefly returned to Klemtu to finish her obligations. I accept that having to decline the career opportunity in Klemtu was quite emotionally difficult for Ms. Gray.
55  Ms. Gray consulted Dr. Maccari on March 31, 2008. She had not seen him about her left arm symptoms for approximately ten months. During the March 31 appointment, Ms. Gray complained of pain and weakness in her left hand and wrist. It is Dr. Maccari's view that the symptoms Ms. Gray reported on March 31 were related to her myofascial difficulties resulting from the effects of the Injection.
56  The defence asserts that the ten-month interval between appointments with Dr. Maccari indicates that Ms. Gray was basically symptom-free during that time frame. The Hospital contends that if Ms. Gray had been genuinely suffering from overuse symptoms, she would have seen her doctor more regularly.
57  Ms. Gray testified that she had felt much better for months preceding the Klemtu assignment in January 2008. She further explained that she did not make an appointment to see Dr. Maccari every time her symptoms of discomfort were triggered by overuse because she understood that there was not much he could do for her beyond renewing her prescriptions for anti-inflammatory medication. She had consulted him relatively regularly in the early stages of her injury and in the fall of 2006 after her return to work when she says that her overuse symptoms developed. With the foregoing in mind, and having regard to the fact that Ms. Gray claims to suffer from a chronic, inoperable condition that comes and goes and is routinely treated by symptom relief that does not require a physician to administer, and given that Ms. Gray is herself a registered nurse with personal knowledge and experience in relation to pain management, I find her explanation for the ten-month interval between her appointments with Dr. Maccari to be perfectly reasonable.
58  Ms. Gavey testified that she had been made aware that it was physically difficult for Ms. Gray to carry out her obligations at Klemtu and perform her duties at VIHA. She also testified that she has not encountered any discipline issues with respect to Ms. Gray apart from one instance where Ms. Gray had missed her shifts over a weekend in around March 2008. She cannot recall any work absences on Ms. Gray's part that stand out; however, she noticed that Ms. Gray used an elevated amount of sick time. She chose not to speak to Ms. Gray about it because she knew that she was involved in this litigation.
59  Ms. Gavey admitted that she did not have much interaction with Ms. Gray. However, she does recall seeing Ms. Gray favouring her left arm, keeping it close to her body, and picking up items with her right hand while at the office. Ms. Gray has never complained directly to Ms. Gavey about her ability to do her job.
60  In describing her current complaints, Ms. Gray testified about being aware of an achiness or heaviness in her left arm all of the time. She intermittently experiences pain along the top of her left arm and below the elbow with an ache that can radiate to her upper arm. From time to time, she has painful flare-ups of her symptoms of tennis elbow and left wrist tendonitis which can produce swelling around her left wrist. The flare-ups appear to be connected to her overuse or strain of her left arm, hand or wrist. Her perception is that the strength of her left hand grip has not been fully restored. Occasionally, during the night, she gets a cramping sensation in her left arm, like a charley horse. She is not able to lay on her left side to fall asleep. At times, her left fingers want to curl in, especially while she rests. She copes with her symptoms by administering a combination of Advil, ice, heat, massage by family or self, rest, and hot baths.
61  Ms Gray was examined for discovery on October 12, 2006, soon after she had begun to experience her overuse symptoms. On discovery, she agreed that driving her standard car was a difficult aspect of her job and that she needed to get an automatic vehicle. At trial, Ms. Gray admitted that she was still driving a stick-shift. She testified that it was her "dream" car and that she did not want "to let everything go". The Hospital submits that her attitude and course of conduct in this regard is not reasonable. I agree that it may not have been entirely rational for Ms. Gray to persist in driving her standard vehicle in the face of her awareness that it presented difficulty. However, the evidence was not adequately developed on the point so as to found a cogent basis for a finding of a failure to mitigate. Ultimately, I conclude that nothing of importance turns on this evidence.
62  Ms. Gray has not applied for a permanent full-time position with VIHA. She is concerned that if she were to do so, she would simply be setting herself up for continuous re-injury. She believes that she could better manage and cope with her left upper limb symptoms brought on by overuse if she were to work at a part-time pace at her current level of 70% of full-time.
(d) The Medical and Functional Capacity Experts
63  In support of her case, Ms. Gray tendered the expert reports of Dr. Maccari and Dr. Tessler. She also relies on the report of Russell McNeil, an occupational therapist and certified work capacity evaluator. Those experts testified at trial (Dr. Tessler, by way of deposition).
64  The only evidence tendered by the Hospital was the expert evidence of Dr. Robert Keyes, a neurologist.
65  There is no controversy among the physicians that as a direct result of the Injection, Ms. Gray sustained a left radial nerve injury. The injury site is located just after the nerve supply has gone to the triceps muscle and has descended the level of the spiral groove in her mid posterior upper left arm. The abnormalities affecting her left radial nerve were due to the mechanical and toxic effects of the Injection. There is also agreement among the physicians that the left radial nerve dysfunction caused Ms. Gray significant left upper limb sensory and motor symptoms, including weakness.
66  All of the physicians share the view that the extent of Ms. Gray's recovery is remarkable; indeed, they describe it as miraculous. There is consensus as well that she no longer experiences any sensory abnormality in her left arm, wrist, hand, or fingers.
67  The Hospital concedes that the Injection has left Ms. Gray with a permanent very mild to mild residual weakness of the extensor muscles of her left forearm, wrist, hand and fingers and as well as the extensor muscle of the elbow. That is not the point of contention. The main issue that divides the medical experts is whether Ms. Gray's complaints of the symptoms that she attributes to the strain or overuse of her left arm, wrist and/or hand are causally linked to the Injection induced radial nerve injury.
Dr. Tessler
68  Ms. Gray's treating neurologist, Dr. Tessler, last examined her on November 27, 2007. He had not seen her for slightly more than year. She relayed to Dr. Tessler the symptoms of discomfort arising from the overuse of her left arm, wrist and hand. She complained of experiencing left arm muscle spasms and occasional neuralgic pain. Dr. Tessler pointed out that neuralgic pain, which emanates from the nerve, is different from pain related to a soft tissue injury. He described it as a "very disagreeable type of pain". Ms. Gray further reported that although her left hand grip was good, it was not as strong as it had been previously. As well, she recounted the incident of tripping, which had revealed a delayed reaction time in her left arm.
69  Dr. Tessler found that while Ms. Gray's left hand had good grip and mobility, her left grip was not as strong as her right. He noted that she had difficulties with endurance, that is sustained repetitive movements, and needed to take breaks to give her arm a rest. No doubt relying on what Ms. Gray reported to him, Dr. Tessler noted that there had been interference with her recreational activities. In his view, she is not able to kayak because the sustained movements over time cause her discomfort and some fatigue, secondary to pain.
70  Dr. Tessler believes that, from time to time, Ms. Gray may experience discomfort that will have to be treated symptomatically. In his opinion, as a result of the Injection, Ms. Gray has been left with a permanent mild partial disability. He thinks she is capable of working as a community nurse, a position he noted did not involve the sustained lifting of patients. In his view, she is also able to look after her home, but may require help periodically with heavier duties, such as gardening. In this context, Dr. Tessler commented that if Ms. Gray needs to do any heavy lifting or carrying, she would have to rely on her normal right side in the event she developed discomfort.
Dr. Keyes
71  Dr. Keyes has seen many patients with radial nerve and other nerve abnormalities caused by problematic intramuscular injections, and patients who experience pain, weakness, and numbness in their extremities. He explained that as a neurologist, his role is to determine whether a neurological abnormality exists for a patient's symptoms. If he is not able to discover a neurological abnormality for the symptoms, the diagnosis is often ligament dysfunction or tendonitis.
72  In his report, Dr. Keyes discusses the physiology of Ms. Gray's nerve injury in considerable detail. None of his general observations were disputed by Drs. Maccari or Tessler. According to Dr. Keyes, Ms. Gray's left radial nerve abnormality involved both the myelin (insulation around the nerve) and the axons (nerve fibers). He explained that the radial nerve contains both sensory and motor nerve fibres. It, therefore, has both sensory and motor functions in the arm. The radial nerve supplies sensation to the back of the upper arms, forearms, hands, fingers and thumb, and supplies motor functions to all of the muscles of extension in the arm. Those extensor muscles are all located on the back of the upper arm and forearm. The extensor muscles of the mid to lower posterior forearm send tendons to the back of the wrist, fingers and thumb that allow for extension or straightening of the wrist, hand, fingers, and thumb. Normal function of these extensor muscles is required to stabilize the joints of those structures during their flexion movements. Therefore, patients with abnormalities of the radial nerve can experience difficulties with hand grip, finger and thumb flexion (curling to the palm), and pincer grasp (bringing the thumb and index finger together).
73  Dr. Keyes conducted an independent clinical neurological assessment of Ms. Gray on January 14, 2008. Among other things, she reported decreased left arm strength generally and in the left hand, wrist and fingers. She complained of decreased grip strength in her left hand with weakness on flexion and extension of her left wrist and fingers, and diminished response time of her left arm. Ms. Gray also told Dr. Keyes that she experienced decreased strength with the pinching of her left thumb and index finger, as well as tenderness and pain in her left elbow. She informed him of the symptoms brought on intermittently by overuse since her return to work.
74  Dr. Keyes found nothing in his examination of Ms. Gray on that day to explain the left arm symptoms that she attributes to overuse. He noted no signs of tenderness anywhere in Ms. Gray's left upper limb, including the outer part of her left elbow. Nor did he find decreased left hand grip strength, although Dr. Tessler had done so, or decreased leftsided pincer grasp strength or clinical signs of tennis elbow.
75  Dr. Keyes remarked that certain of Ms. Gray's complaints, such as weakness of finger flexion, presented as normal on examination and were not functions related to the radial nerve in any event. He agreed that swelling at the wrist would be consistent with a diagnosis of tendonitis. Ms. Gray believed that she had reported to Dr. Keyes the left wrist swelling that she had experienced and had previously reported to Dr. Maccari. However, Dr. Keyes' recollection is, and his report notes, that Ms. Gray denied any swelling in her left wrist, forearm, hand, or digits.
76  Dr. Keyes took great care, both in his written report and in his testimony, to emphasize that at the particular time he examined Ms. Gray, he had not detected her overuse symptoms. In cross-examination, he agreed that certain of her symptoms, such as swelling, may simply not have been present at the time that he carried out his examination. Similarly, he agreed that in cases of subacute tendonitis, which can be chronic, abnormalities may not be detected on a clinical examination. In considering Dr. Keyes' findings on his examination, it is important to bear in mind that Ms. Gray does not complain of unrelenting extensor muscle tenderness or constant wrist tenderness or swelling; rather, she says that her symptoms come and go. They may not have been perceptible at the time of Dr. Keyes' examination.
77  Dr. Keyes did identify certain deficits in the motor function of Ms. Gray's left upper limb caused by the radial nerve damage. He found very mild to mild weakness affecting the extensor muscles of her left wrist, hand, fingers and thumb. The degree of that weakness was in the range of approximately 85% to 95% of normal. He also discovered weakness of the left brachioradialis, one of the extensor muscles of the elbow supplied by the radial nerve. He estimated the strength of that muscle to be approximately 90% to 95% of normal. In addition, he noted a mildly diminished left brachioradialis reflex. He further noted that Ms. Gray's reports of weakness of grip strength and pincer grasp were indirectly due to the very mild to mild weakness in the extensor muscles of her left wrist, hand, fingers and thumb, supplied by the left radial nerve.
78  Dr. Keyes' opinion is that Ms. Gray's very mild to mild left radial nerve weakness is a permanent residual dysfunction. He regarded it as highly unlikely that she would experience any recurrence or additional left radial nerve motor dysfunction in the future.
79  In Dr. Keyes' opinion, the mild degree of Ms. Gray's residual left arm radial nerve motor dysfunction was insufficient to implicate any causal relationship between it and her tennis elbow, or any other secondary joint, tendon or ligament abnormality in Ms. Gray's left upper limb. He remarked that tennis elbow is a common condition that almost invariably occurs in the absence of any associated arm peripheral nerve dysfunction. It may be brought on by repetitive or unaccustomed movement. While Dr. Keyes did not say so directly, what his remarks imply is that Ms. Gray's tennis elbow was caused by certain work or non-work activities, or a combination of them, unrelated to the effects of the Injection.
80  Dr. Keyes agreed that Ms. Gray's very mild to mild weakness in her radial nerve distribution could result in a very mild degree of decreased endurance and increased fatigue associated with rugged sporting events that require the use of both arms, like kayaking. Other than that, his view is that there were no self-reported symptoms or identified general medical or clinical neurological signs that would lead him to conclude that Ms. Gray would be restricted in any less strenuous sporting activities or in her usual day-to-day activities. During the course of his cross-examination, it became evident that Dr. Keyes knew very little about the kinds of activities in which Ms. Gray had engaged before the Injection, or that she had used her left hand to play tennis and shoot pool.
81  Throughout his report, Dr. Keyes stated repeatedly that despite Ms. Gray's minimal residual weakness, she has been able to perform all aspects of her duties as a community nurse without restrictions. That statement may be accurate in a narrow sense; however, it fails to address the larger picture. Ms. Gray's allegation is not that she is unable to perform her tasks at work per se; rather, the nub of her complaint is that when she overuses her left arm, wrist and/or hand, whether during her work or outside of work, she is susceptible to episodic flare-ups of soft tissue symptoms that cause her discomfort and pain. The preponderance of the evidence establishes that she has intermittently experienced these overuse symptoms when she works at a pace at some point beyond her regular 70% shift allotment.
Dr. Maccari
82  It is Dr. Maccari's opinion that since Ms. Gray's return to work in June 2006 and persisting to the time of trial, she has suffered from a partial disability due to her tennis elbow, left extensor muscle strain and left wrist extensor tendonitis. He maintains that all three diagnoses are related to the overuse of Ms. Gray's left upper limb and that none were present prior to the Injection. He states his opinion in his report dated April 15, 2007, as follows:
I feel that during the period of time from her original injury in January 2005 until June 2006 despite treatment with splints and physiotherapy that Ms. Gray suffered some degree of permanent loss of muscle mass and hence strength in her left arm, wrist and hand. When she returned to work in June 2006, her work-related activities caused these overuse injuries. However, I feel that the left radial nerve damage caused by the January 24, 2005 injection in turn caused persistent weakness to the extensor mechanism of her left hand, wrist and forearm which was responsible for these overuse injuries once she returned to work. This left distal arm extensor muscle weakness has persisted and likely will continue indefinitely. In other words, this partial disability will likely continue indefinitely, to some extent, and Ms. Gray will likely continue to experience flares of her left distal forearm and wrist pain and weakness as a result of left arm and hand activities at work or at home.
83  Dr. Maccari was not surprised by Ms. Gray's reports of overuse symptoms shortly after her return to work. He clarified that when he had stated that she "should" be able to return to work in June 2006, he was hedging his bets and had not been absolutely sure.
84  Dr. Maccari is cautious about the scope of Ms. Gray's future work capacity. He believes that she will need to restrict her work as a nurse to permanent part-time indefinitely in order to prevent chronic left arm pain and disability. He also believes that despite a restriction in her work activities, she may require periods of time off work in the future to treat acute flare-ups of her left arm inflammation, a condition he termed as "acute on chronic". As well, Dr. Maccari predicts that Ms. Gray will likely need to permanently limit her home and recreational activities that require the use of her distal left arm. He noted that whereas before the Injection, Ms. Gray was able to use her left arm freely for such activities, she would likely have to pay attention to the degree of her activities, such as picking up her grandson, performing housework, and gardening, now and into the future in order to prevent triggering acute flares of her overuse symptoms with resultant pain and disability. It is Dr. Maccari's view that Ms. Gray will benefit from some degree of ongoing massage therapy and/or physiotherapy to treat episodes of acute symptom flare-ups.
85  Dr. Maccari agreed that he would defer to Dr. Keyes' expertise on issues pertaining specifically to nerve and nerve function. However, he was not prepared to defer with respect to soft tissue injuries. He believes that he has more experience than a neurologist in diagnosing musculoskeletal disorders. It is a routine component of his general practice. Moreover, Dr. Maccari emphasized that it has never been his view that the Injection directly caused Ms. Gray's soft tissue difficulties. He persuasively explained that Ms. Gray compensated for the Injection induced injury to the motor functions of her left arm, by recruiting other muscles to perform tasks that they would not ordinarily perform. That muscle recruitment process put her at risk for soft tissue injury.
86  The significant difference between the opinions of Dr. Maccari and Dr. Keyes turns on their respective views of the impact of Ms. Gray's mildly weakened extensor muscles. In Dr. Maccari's view, Ms. Gray's weaker muscles do not always work optimally. When she is performing activities that would normally engage her slightly weaker extensor muscles, her body may recruit other muscles or muscle groups to compensate for that weakness. According to Dr. Maccari, that compensatory process can trigger Ms. Gray's overuse symptoms of inflammation, swelling, pain, and global achiness and heaviness. He likened it to a domino effect in the body.
87  Dr. Keyes accepts that one cannot consider muscles in isolation; he concedes that if one part of a muscle group is not being used as intended, then the entire muscle system may be negatively affected and may cause soft tissue symptoms. He also agreed with the general proposition that accessory muscles would be engaged in physical movements that would ordinarily use damaged or weakened muscles.
88  As noted earlier, Dr. Maccari had observed muscle atrophy of Ms. Gray's left upper limb when he saw her on June 15, 2005. In his view, during the seventeen month period between the time of the Injection and Ms. Gray's return to work, she suffered some degree of permanent loss of muscle mass with resultant loss of strength in her left arm, hand, and wrist. Dr. Keyes agreed that Ms. Gray would have lost muscle mass from the paralysis of her left arm. He deferred to Dr. Maccari's observation of Ms. Gray's muscle atrophy made at a particular time. He further agreed that an overused muscle can over-develop and increase in bulk, a condition referred to as hypertrophy, being the opposite of atrophy. However, in his examination, Dr. Keyes found that Ms. Gray's left arm muscle tone, bulk and circumference were normal and symmetrical when compared to her right.
89  I have concluded that the evidence pertaining to Ms. Gray's muscle bulk in her left arm is not determinative in the assessment of whether her overuse symptoms are causally connected to the extensor muscle weakness. Specifically, in my view, the fact that Dr. Keyes did not identify any loss of muscle mass when he examined Ms. Gray's left arm is not, of itself, sufficient to discredit Dr. Maccari's core opinion that her episodic overuse symptoms are the result of the residual weakness to her left arm extensor mechanism, and the compensatory muscle process that this weakness, in all likelihood, engages.
90  Dr. Maccari had diagnosed Ms. Gray's left wrist tendonitis long before she returned to work. In cross examination, Dr. Keyes agreed that some, though not all, patients can develop tendonitis during the nerve regeneration process. In this regard, he clarified that as a nerve regenerates, one can only actively move the muscle or muscles related to that nerve to the extent of the regeneration. He explained that whether that process would result in tendonitis would depend on many factors, such as the degree of weakness in the affected muscle or muscle group. He did not expand the point much beyond that statement. Dr. Keyes agreed that Ms. Gray's complaints of pain during her recovery were consistent with tendonitis. While he agreed that she could have developed tendonitis during the recovery from her nerve injury, he believes that because her extensor muscles were only minimally weak by the time she returned to work, any subsequent tendonitis would be unconnected to that muscle weakness. In the end, Dr. Keyes would not agree that Ms. Gray's current soft tissue overuse symptoms are related to difficulties with the functioning of her weakened extensor muscles caused by the misplaced Injection.
Mr. McNeil
91  On September 5, 2007, Mr. McNeil spent several hours assessing Ms. Gray's present capacity to perform her work as a registered nurse and her overall capacity to complete functional activities. As part of his assessment, he administered a battery of functional tests. Those included tests of her range of motion, upper extremity strength, vertical and horizontal reaching capacity, and grip and pincher strength. He did not give Ms. Gray any tests involving lifting or carrying. He also administered additional tests aimed at gauging Ms. Gray's effort in performing movements and reliability in self-reporting pain. In Mr. McNeil's opinion, the test results provided a reliable measure of Ms. Gray's physical capacity.
92  Mr. McNeil's testing revealed a variety of restrictions in relation to Ms. Gray's capacity to reach, grip, pinch, and handle things. He found that she consistently demonstrated restrictions in her capacity for activity requiring vertical reaching and horizontal reaching using her left arm. He noted measured restrictions in her upper extremity strength. He also found restrictions in her mobility and general endurance.
93  In his report, Mr. McNeil concluded that Ms. Gray demonstrated the capacity to perform activities that require modified light level strength. In his opinion, she had shown the capacity to perform her work as a community nurse on a full-time basis. However, he stated that there were restrictions in her work capacity and that she would continue to require accommodations, including being able to pace herself, in order to work both part-time and full-time. Mr. McNeil remarked further that Ms. Gray's left arm restrictions would likely continue to interfere with two-handed tasks.
94  Dr. Keyes was taken through portions of Mr. McNeil's report. He pointed out that Ms. Gray had reported restrictions of certain functions of muscle movements that were not supplied by the radial nerve. Those included curling her fingers, grip and pinching, left wrist flexion, elbow flexion, and reaching overhead. She also reported a demonstrated weakness in the small intrinsic muscles of her left hand. She had variously reported a number of these symptoms to Drs. Maccari, Tessler and Keyes.
95  Among other things, Ms. Gray described her gripping and pinching ability to Mr. McNeil as "severely restricted". By Mr. McNeil's definition, a severe restriction indicates a movement that is interfering and prone to be avoided and that requires extra breaks and the need to shift after 15-30 minutes. Ms. Gray had evidently not described the intensity of her left grip and pinch in such extreme terms to Dr. Maccari, Dr. Tessler, or Dr. Keyes.
96  Mr. McNeil agreed that he did not understand all aspects of Ms. Gray's job as a community nurse. For that reason, he was not able to assess whether the restrictions that he had measured of her functioning capacity were slight, moderate, or severe.
III. DISCUSSION
97  The onus rests with Ms. Gray to prove, on a balance of probabilities, that but for the Injection she would not experience the symptoms of pain and global achiness and heaviness triggered episodically with the overuse of her left arm, hand and/or wrist.
98  Ms. Gray was a credible and reliable witness. She was forthright and direct in giving her testimony and notably candid in answering questions on cross-examination. Cross-examination of her revealed possible discrepancies in terms of the symptoms she reported to various physicians and experts across time. I find, however, that to the extent there were inconsistencies, they were of a minor nature and taken together, do not detract from Ms. Gray's overall credibility or the reliability of her evidence. Specifically, I do not find that Ms. Gray magnified the nature, frequency, or intensity of her overuse symptoms or revised the truth to advance her litigation objectives.
99  I believe that Ms. Gray has been suffering intermittent symptoms of pain and global achiness and heaviness in her upper left limb since her return to work. I am satisfied that they are probably triggered by the overuse of her left arm, wrist and/or hand, predominantly, although not exclusively, when she takes on extra work shifts that approach or are equivalent to a full-time work pace. I find as well that these symptoms continue to plague Ms. Gray currently and accept her evidence about the detrimental effect they have had on her life.
100  Drs. Maccari and Keyes concur that damage to the left radial nerve can produce symptoms of discomfort and pain in muscles that are not innervated by the damaged nerve. This can occur as a result of accessory muscle use, when muscles innervated by the damaged nerve are not performing optimally. In Ms. Gray's case, there is some evidence that this compensatory process engaged early on, as the radial nerve repaired. Dr. Keyes' essential opinion is that Ms. Gray's current soft tissue complaints are wholly unrelated to the significant left radial nerve sensory and motor dysfunction brought on by the Injection which has left her with a permanent mild residual left-sided extensor muscle weakness. A proposition that logically flows from his opinion is that it is purely coincidental that Ms. Gray now experiences chronic left arm, wrist and hand symptoms. Before receiving the Injection, Ms. Gray had no difficulties with her left arm, wrist or hand despite engaging in a broad range of intense physical activities, leisure pursuits and work that involved her left upper limb. While I recognize that the manifestation of a medical condition may not correlate well or even at all with common sense, and acknowledge the dangers inherent in applying simple temporal reasoning when determining legal causation, in the circumstances of this case, I have great difficulty accepting the absence of a causative link between Ms. Gray's left radial nerve injury and its residual effects, and the onset of her chronic condition.
101  A fundamental factual issue is whether Ms. Gray's mild to very mild residual extensor muscle weakness resulting from the Injection induced radial nerve injury, has caused her soft tissue overuse symptoms. In addressing this issue, the focus is on the manner of response of Ms. Gray's musculoskeletal structure to the radial nerve injury and her minimally weakened extensor muscles. Dr. Maccari had not encountered a patient with a radial nerve injury before Ms. Gray. However, he has extensive experience, which I accept is greater than Dr. Keyes' experience, dealing with patients who suffer from tendonitis and other soft tissue conditions. Dr. Maccari has provided a fulsome and nuanced analysis of the probable cause of Ms. Gray's chronic left arm overuse symptoms. I accept his thesis that Ms. Gray's left radial nerve injury and residual permanently weakened left extensor muscles have given rise to her chronic soft tissue condition through the compensatory muscle recruitment process that he described. In my view, the fact that Ms. Gray has experienced intermittent pain in muscles that are not innervated by the radial nerve is also adequately explained by Dr. Maccari's opinion regarding the use of compensatory muscles flowing from her extensor muscle weakness.
102  I find that it is probable that, had Ms. Gray not received the Injection, she would not have experienced or continue to experience the left upper limb overuse symptoms. Because her residual weakness is permanent, I find that Ms. Gray's chronic condition will likely not change or improve by any remarkable measure.
(a) Non-Pecuniary Loss
103  The objective of non-pecuniary damages is to compensate a plaintiff's pain, suffering, and loss of enjoyment of life. The essential principle, articulated in a variety of ways, is that fairness and reasonableness of the amount of an award is measured by the adverse impact of the particular injuries on the particular individual plaintiff. Consequently, while fairness is assessed by reference to awards made in comparable cases, it is "impossible to develop a tariff": Lindal v. Lindal,  at 637, . In the end, each case is decided on its own unique facts: Kuskis v. Tin,  [Kuskis]; Noriega v. Lewars, . Because it is not entirely possible to restore a plaintiff to her original position by an award of money, the process is one of assessment and not of mathematical precision.
104  In Stapley v. Hejslet,  at para. 46, , Kirkpatrick J.A. enumerated a non-exhaustive list of factors to be considered in awarding non-pecuniary damages. They include: the plaintiff's age; the nature of the injury; the severity and duration of the pain; disability; emotional suffering; loss or impairment of life; impairment of family, marital and social relationships; impairment of physical and mental abilities; and loss of lifestyle.
105  The initial manifestation of Ms. Gray's left radial nerve injury was profound and disabling. It was devastating and "changed everything" in her life in a negative way. She was unable to dress herself or attend fully to her own personal care. She was no longer able to participate in the recreational activities that she enjoyed or many of the leisure and domestic pursuits that she found so satisfying. For a considerable period of time, she was forced to confront the distressing prospect of suffering significant and irreversible sensory and motor dysfunction of her left arm, hand and fingers. She has endured soft tissue pain as well as "very disagreeable" neurologic pain. Her compromised ability to be the wife she once was proved to be the straw that broke her fractured marriage.
106  Dr. Maccari perceives Ms. Gray to be a stoic woman who is not prone to show much distress or emotion. He testified that she responded more emotionally to this ordeal than she has to any other matter for which she ever consulted him.
107  Fortunately, Ms. Gray has experienced remarkable recovery. But it is not a full recovery. She has been left with a permanent residual weakness of her left brachioradialis muscle and the extensor muscles of her left forearm, wrist, hand and fingers and a diminished brachioradialis reflex. Although her weakness is classified as mild and very mild, it is not benign. As well, the fact that Ms. Gray's extensor muscle weakness ranges between mild and very mild does not necessarily mean that the level of pain that she has experienced in the past or will likely suffer episodically in the future, will be likewise minimal or mild. The two do not invariably march hand in glove.
108  Ms. Gray's overuse symptoms mostly arise when she takes on extra shifts and, thereby, works more than 70% of full-time; however, they can also be triggered by her non-work activities, or through a combination of work and non-work overuse. Even when her symptoms are not active or painful, they interfere with Ms. Gray's life to some extent. This is because on her days off from work, she feels that she must take extra care to restrict her activities to some degree or avoid them outright in order to preserve the functioning of her left arm for work.
109  I accept that the lifestyle changes brought on by Ms. Gray's divorce and the sale of the Coombs property have impacted the kinds of activities available to her at the present time. Regardless, the dominant consideration must be that because of her injuries stemming from the Injection, Ms. Gray will not be able to undertake certain activities that she once enjoyed or take up certain new activities in the future, without exposing herself to the risk of triggering flare-ups of her symptoms, which may cause her pain and may result in temporary wage loss. She has also lost confidence to participate in more rigorous activities such as kayaking. The quality and enjoyment of Ms. Gray's life have been changed in various ways and by varying degrees across a wide range of activities, by the ill-effects of the Injection.
110  Shortly after Ms. Gray began to report her overuse symptoms to Dr. Maccari, he recommended that she seek treatment from a physiotherapist and from a massage therapist to relieve her acute symptoms. She did not do so after about October 2006. Ms. Gray's evidence is that her financial circumstances were too tight to cover those costs. She also testified that her daughter provided massage on a relatively regular basis while they lived under the same roof. As Sierra Gray's life became busier with the arrival of her son and the start of a full-time job in September 2006, she found it increasingly difficult to find the time to give regular massages to her mother. Her recollection was that she last gave her mother a massage approximately one month before this trial. On that occasion, her mother had worked a long day and was complaining of pain in her left arm. I find Ms. Gray's explanation for not following Dr. Maccari's recommendations after October 2006 to be truthful and regard it as legitimate. In closing submissions, counsel for the Hospital raised the issue of Ms. Gray's failure to seek those treatments. It was not entirely clear as to whether in doing so, the defence is asserting a failure to mitigate on Ms. Gray's part. To the extent that it is purporting to do so, I reject it. The Hospital has not discharged its onus to prove that Ms. Gray failed to mitigate her loss in that way or in any other respect.
111  Having reviewed the authorities provided by Ms. Gray and the Hospital, and having considered the totality of the evidence pertaining to Ms. Gray's specific circumstances, I conclude that a fair and reasonable award for non-pecuniary damages is <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$80,000</damage>.
(b) Past Income Loss
112  There is no quarrel between the parties that Ms. Gray suffered income loss as a result of the Injection from the date that she would have otherwise returned to work following her hysterectomy, which I find was March 7, 2005, until her return to work on June 21, 2006. Ms. Gray claims the sum of <damage type = "other">$55,228.50</damage> for that period. The Hospital concedes that calculation is accurate so long as it does not include reimbursement for the sick leave taken while she convalescenced from her hysterectomy.
113  The evidence establishes that there are nine levels, or steps, of pay rates for nurses pursuant to the terms of their applicable collective agreement. An employee generally ascends the steps annually on her seniority date and thereby receives an increase to her base salary. Wanda Best, payroll coordinator at VIHA, testified that had Ms. Gray not taken a leave of absence due to the Injection, she would have progressed through the various steps differently. Due to her leave of absence, Ms. Gray lost approximately eight months of seniority. This affected and continues to affect her progression through the prescribed pay rates. That loss has been factored in as a component of the sum of <damage type = "other">$55,228.50</damage>.
114  Ms. Best confirmed that Ms. Gray also received a decreased signing bonus on account of her missed work. That loss is <damage type = "other">$581.74</damage>. It is accepted as compensable by the defence.
115  Ms. Gray also seeks damages in respect of losses of the following:
vacation accrual - <damage type = "other">$2,700.67</damage>;
qualification differential - <damage type = "other">$1,044.41</damage>;
shift and weekend differential - <damage type = "other">$484.00</damage>;
sick bank accrual - <damage type = "other">$273.06</damage>;
missed step increment - <damage type = "other">$2,852.92</damage>;
time missed from work between June 22, 2006, and April 16, 2007 - <damage type = "other">$3,283.43</damage>;
loss of opportunity to work full-time hours/past loss of capacity - not quantified.
116  In the course of the trial, counsel advised that that the parties had agreed on the sum of <damage type = "past wage loss">$60,000</damage> as damages to compensate Ms. Gray for her past income loss. The Court was not provided with a detailed breakdown of the various elements comprising this agreed figure.
117  In accordance with the parties' agreement, Ms. Gray is entitled to an award of <damage type = "past wage loss">$60,000</damage> in compensation for her past income loss.
(c) Loss of Future Earning Capacity
118  Ms. Gray is seeking damages for her diminished earning capacity in the future, attributable to the injuries that she says she will likely continue to suffer into the future as a result of the Injection. Her essential contention is that the prospect of working as a nurse on a full-time basis has been foreclosed to her on account of the Hospital's negligence. Ms. Gray asserts that due to her chronic condition caused by the Injection, she can comfortably work part-time hours only, and at most the equivalent of 70% of full-time.
119  The Hospital accepts that Ms. Gray has suffered a very mild or mild permanent injury to her left arm and that, as such, her "capital asset" has been mildly impaired. It further concedes that, as a result, Ms. Gray is now precluded from working full-time in the areas of nursing which involve more strenuous physical duties than those in community care nursing. The defence urges a modest award for Ms. Gray's loss of future earning capacity, in the range of <damage type = "other">$22,000</damage>, on the premise that her episodic overuse symptoms are not causally linked to her left radial nerve injury. In the alternative, the Hospital submits that if Ms. Gray's overuse symptoms have been caused by the Injection, an award of <damage type = "other">$35,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage> would amply compensate her under this head.
120  The issue here is whether Ms. Gray's future earning capacity has been impaired or diminished by the injuries she sustained by the negligence of the Hospital. If it has, then the Court must look at the companion issue of what amount, in light of all the evidence, should she be awarded as compensation for that impairment. Because this is a future loss, Ms. Gray need only prove the realistic or substantial possibility, as distinct from a probability, that owing to her injuries caused by the Injection, her earning capacity has been impaired.
121  The law has long recognized that unknown contingencies and uncertain factors make it impossible to calculate lost future earning capacity with any precision. It is because the occurrence of future events is unknown, that allowances must be made for the contingency that the assumptions underlying a proposed award may prove to be wrong. Accordingly, the process of quantification in respect of any impairment is one of assessment based on the evidence, taking into account all relevant positive and negative contingencies:
Milina v. Bartsch  (B.C.S.C.); Rosvold v. Dunlop, ,  [Rosvold]; Reilly v. Lynn  (B.C.C.A.); Durand v. Bolt, , .
122  In Palmer v. Goodall  at 59 (C.A.), Southin J.A. made the following clarifying remarks in relation to the concept of future impairment:
Because it is impairment that is being redressed, even a plaintiff who is apparently going to be able to earn as much as he could have earned if not injured or who, with retraining, on the balance of probabilities will be able to do so, is entitled to some compensation for the impairment. He is entitled to it because for the rest of his life some occupations will be closed to him and it is impossible to say that over his working life the impairment will not harm his income earning ability.
123  In determining whether Ms. Gray's earning capacity has been impaired, the court will consider factors such as whether she has been rendered less capable overall of earning income from all types of employment; is less marketable or attractive as a potential employee; has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities that might otherwise have been open; and is less valuable to herself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market: Brown v. Golaiy  (S.C.); Kuskis.
124  The Hospital contends that upon returning to work in June 2006, Ms. Gray was able to, and in fact did, work full-time hours on a relatively consistent basis. That overstates the situation somewhat. Ms. Gray testified that there were periods of time in which she picked up several extra shifts so as to be working the equivalent of a full-time position and, on occasion, more than full-time. Although Ms. Gavey was "pretty sure" that Ms. Gray's shifts corresponded to full-time, Ms. Gray credibly testified about periods of time where she did not work full-time hours. She also clarified that there were instances when she was not even able to work her 70% allotment on account of her overuse symptoms. The evidence establishes that regular full-time earnings of a registered nurse such as Ms. Gray would be just under <damage type = "other">$70,000</damage> annually as at the date of trial. However, that figure does not take into account the premium rates of pay for shifts worked on evenings, weekends or statutory holidays, or higher rates of pay for select nursing positions such as outpost nursing. Ms. Gray routinely worked the holiday, weekend and evening shifts having the premium rates of pay and had attempted, but failed, to assume an outpost position. The payroll records in evidence must be read carefully if used to determine Ms. Gray's true pace of work because they include in the tabulation of her hours worked, the notional addition of hours attached to premium shifts, even though those hours were never actually worked. A similar caution applies to the treatment given to Ms. Gray's gross earnings as reflected in her recent income tax returns.
125  In my assessment, the evidence indicates that after her return to work in June 2006, Ms. Gray's hours fluctuated. In any given week, they at times fell below or were equal to her 70% allotment, and at other times, likely the majority of times, fell within a range of greater than 70% and full-time equivalency. I think it is fair to say that when her hours of work came within that latter range of between 70% and 100%, they frequently approximated full-time hours. A fundamental point that must not be lost is that where Ms. Gray was working close or equal to full-time, she would frequently pay the price in the sense of suffering an episode of overuse symptoms.
126  Donna Townsend is the ability management consultant for VIHA. Her first involvement with Ms. Gray came about in March 2008 when a supervisor brought to her attention that Ms. Gray had been absent for four work shifts. Ms. Townsend had a discussion with Ms. Gray and determined that no further action was required because Ms. Gray demonstrated to her a solid understanding of when she was able to work extra shifts over and above her regular rotation.
127  Ms. Townsend confirmed that there is a high need in all areas of nursing, including non-patient care areas, and that there would likely be full-time opportunities for Ms. Gray in less physically demanding nursing jobs. She noted that some nursing positions do not involve patient care or prolonged typing, or are in the midst of replacing typing with the use of a computer mouse. Presumably Ms. Gray would use her dominant and unaffected right arm in manipulating the mouse. Ms. Gavey similarly testified that there are continually job postings for full-time nursing postions in VIHA which are not as physically demanding as community nursing. She testified that if Ms. Gray wanted to she would probably be able to find a less physically demanding full-time nursing job within a year.
128  Ms. Townsend gave important evidence about the scope of VIHA's duty to accommodate an injured nurse under the terms of their collective agreement. She explained that Ms. Gray was entitled to request a job accommodation in relation to difficulties she was experiencing performing the duties of her permanent part-time position. Due to the nature of Ms. Gray's duties as a community nurse, Ms. Gavey does not believe that she would be able to accommodate Ms. Gray in her current position. In any case, it is clear that that duty to accommodate would not extend to any new full-time position that Ms. Gray might obtain. Therefore, if Ms. Gray were hired in a fresh nursing position and it transpired that she was not able to fully perform her requisite duties because of the same difficulties, she would not be entitled to an accommodation by VIHA. If it turned out that her former 70% position had been filled by another nurse in the meantime, then that position would be lost to Ms. Gray. Ms. Townsend's evidence revealed that Ms. Gray would assume a gamble of sorts if she were to leave her current permanent part-time position and apply for a permanent full-time nursing posting. I do not regard the degree of that risk to be insignificant.
129  Ms. Gavey also spoke to the fact that if Ms. Gray were to apply for a full-time nursing position in VIHA, she would be required to complete a form for the prospective area manager. On the form, Ms. Gavey would be obligated to record Ms. Gray's current difficulties, which the prospective hiring manager would no doubt take into account in determining whether to hire Ms. Gray. A medical certification of fitness from Ms. Gray's physician might be required as a pre-requisite to Ms. Gray being hired for the new position.
130  Defence counsel made much of the fact that Mr. McNeil holds the opinion that Ms. Gray is capable of working full-time. I agree that his opinion is worthy of careful consideration. In looking at it closely, it is clear that he qualified his opinion in important respects. Mr. McNeil noted that there are restrictions in Ms. Gray's overall work capacity, that she will continue to need accommodations at work and that her left arm restrictions will likely continue to interfere with two-handed tasks. His view is that she would require accommodation if she worked both full-time and part-time.
131  Mr. McNeil admitted that he did not know all aspects of Ms. Gray's job as a community nurse. He had based his opinion as to her functional capacity for work, in part, on the NOC code for a registered community nurse, which categorizes the level of such work as being sedentary to light. Ms. Townsend, who has a better appreciation of the physical demands of Ms. Gray's job, confirmed that there was no heavy lifting involved in community care nursing. However, she also testified that VIHA used a classification of moderate to heavy, not sedentary to light, in respect of Ms. Gray's position.
132  Mr. McNeil did not express optimism in terms of the vocational alternatives available to Ms. Gray within the nursing profession. He states that if she were no longer working in community nursing, her options for nursing would be limited given the ongoing physical restrictions that he identified. In his view, she would not be capable of working as a nurse in extended care, post surgical care, cardiac care or surgery due to her restricted strength and stamina. The evidence of Ms. Townsend and Ms. Gavey about the breadth of employment opportunities in nursing open to Ms. Gray must be considered with Mr. McNeil's opinion in mind.
133  As mentioned earlier, Dr. Maccari's opinion is that Ms. Gray must restrict her work as a nurse to part-time for an indefinite period and that even with such a restriction she may require periods of time off work in order to treat acute flares of her left arm symptoms.
134  I do not accept that Ms. Gray will only be able to work as a nurse the equivalent of 70% of full-time until her retirement as a result of her Injection related limitations. The evidence supports a finding that she is likely able to work something more than 70% but less than 100% of a full-time community nurse position without triggering her overuse symptoms. It is not possible to pinpoint with exactitude where on the spectrum of work intensity between 70% and 100% of full-time, Ms. Gray's tolerance threshold may lay. My assessment of the evidence is that there is a substantial possibility that she is and will be able to continue to work as a community care nurse at a pace greater than 70% without the risk of triggering the overuse symptoms. I do not, however, accept that she is able to work on a full-time basis or closely approximating that pace, without likely triggering her symptoms episodically. There is also a prospect of Ms. Gray being able to move into a nursing position that is more administrative in nature however, there is no guarantee that the demands of those positions will not trigger flare-ups of her overuse symptoms. Moreover, as pointed out by Ms. Gavey and Ms. Townsend, a change of course to a new nursing position entails a level of risk to Ms. Gray. There is evidence as well that Ms. Gray's functional work capacity may be lower with respect to certain other nursing positions, such as the Klemtu posting and those identified by Mr. McNeil, and that some kinds of nursing positions are simply no longer open to her.
135  In my view, the preponderance of the evidence demonstrates an impairment of Ms. Gray's future earning capacity and that it is likely that her impairment will harm her earning ability into the future. The Injection has rendered Ms. Gray less capable overall of earning income from all types of employment; less marketable or attractive as a potential employee and has taken from her the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities that might otherwise have been open to her. She is entitled to compensation for that impairment.
136  Mr. Robert Carson, a consulting economist, provided calculations intended to assist the Court in the evaluation of Ms. Gray's future economic loss. He estimated that her annual earnings in regular full-time work would have been equal to approximately <damage type = "other">$69,900</damage>. That figure included a modest qualification differential applicable to Ms. Gray because she holds a bachelor's degree, but excluded shift differential pay, acting pay, overtime or promotion.
137  Mr. Carson provided a table of multipliers for use in the calculation of the present value of any pattern of future earnings loss. The mortality risk relative to a B.C. female is the only contingency built into those calculations. He did not deduct for other non-voluntary or for voluntary work force contingencies. Mr. Carson also provided, in a separate table, the present value of sample earning streams of Ms. Gray. According to Mr. Carson's figures, the present value of the difference in income between Ms. Gray working full-time and working 70% until retirement at age 65 is <damage type = "other">$352,525</damage>.
138  Valuation of a future loss may take the form of comparing the respective income streams of what Ms. Gray would probably earn but for the Injection, with what she will probably earn in her injured state. However, as noted by the Court of Appeal in Rosvold, that comparison is not conclusive: the overall fairness and reasonableness of the award must also be considered.
139  Mr. Carson noted that the risks of unemployment and of being unable to work on a full-time basis are very low among nurses. He further remarked that the earnings of nurses are subject to health risks because the work is somewhat physically demanding. At the same time, however, he explained that the effects of health risks are largely offset by benefit coverage provided under the collective agreement. Mr. Carson did not take into account in his calculations of sample earnings streams, the probability of Ms. Gray choosing to reduce her hours of work. His rationale is that there are factors at play in Ms. Gray's circumstances that would tend to reduce the likelihood of her either choosing to work part-time or deciding to leave the paid workforce. Those factors include the fact that Ms. Gray had elected to enter a career in nursing relatively late in life, that her children were now grown, that her marriage had recently ended and that she is self-supporting. In this connection, Ms. Gray testified that about three years before receiving the Injection, she had worked full-time for under a year. She stopped because she found the pace to be "too much" and opted instead to work 70%.
140  The defence appears to suggest that Ms. Gray does not truly intend to work full-time as a nurse and that it is unlikely that she will do so at any future time. It asserts that she would prefer instead to maintain her permanent part-time position and pick up extra shifts as she likes in order to be free to regularly care for her grandson once or twice per week. I see the evidence quite differently. When Ms. Gray decided to stop working full-time her children were much younger and still attending school. I accept her testimony that her plan had been to resume work on a full-time basis once both of her children graduated from high school. As it turned out, more urgent financial pressures brought on by her divorce accelerated her need to work more than 70% somewhat earlier than when her youngest child graduated in 2007. Ms. Gray has demonstrated a genuine intention to work as close to a full-time pace as she was physically able from time to time since her return to work following the Injection.
141  Mr. Carson testified about the difference in pension benefits that Ms. Gray will receive if she continues to work on a part-time basis into the future as opposed to working full-time. He admitted that the amount of her pension loss was relatively small in the overall scheme.
142  In applying the relevant legal principles, taking into account the case authorities presented by each side and using my judgment as best I can on the totality of the evidence, I conclude that, in all the circumstances, the sum of <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$160,000</damage> is a fair and reasonable measure of Ms. Gray's loss of future earning capacity. To that figure I would add the sum of <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$9,000</damage> which I conclude represents adequate compensation for the negative effects on Ms. Gray's pension.
(d) Cost of Future Care
143  I find that it is more likely than not that Ms. Gray will require physiotherapy and massage therapy periodically to assist in the treatment of episodic flare-ups of her overuse symptoms into the future. Her counsel estimates the cost of those therapies would amount to <damage type = "other">$400</damage> per year.
144  Dr. Maccari's opinion is that Ms. Gray will also need some assistance with housework and home maintenance activities indefinitely. Dr. Tessler indicated that Ms. Gray may only require help periodically with heavier duties such as gardening. The garden at her current home consists of two little grass patches. Ms. Gray's counsel submits that she will require approximately <damage type = "other">$2,300</damage> per year for yard work and home maintenance that she can no longer do herself. Even if she were to move to a larger property with a yard and/or garden, I consider the quantum of that aspect of the claim to be excessive.
145  The purpose of awarding damages for the cost of future care is to compensate for a financial loss reasonably incurred to sustain or promote the mental and/or physical health of an injured plaintiff. The cost must be justified as reasonable in the sense of being medically required or justified, and in the sense that the plaintiff will be likely to incur them based on the evidence. In Kuskis, the court summarized the relevant principles in relation to a claim for cost of future care at paras. 163-164:
An award for the cost of future care is notional and imprecise in nature: Strachan (Guardian ad Litem of) v. Reynolds, . The court must consider evidence regarding what care is likely in the injured person's best interest and calculate its present cost, with appropriate adjustment for contingencies in all of the circumstances of the case: Courdin v. Meyers, .
146  I am satisfied that an award for future cost of care aimed predominantly at covering the costs of physiotherapy and massage to treat episodic flare-ups are reasonably justified. Using Mr. Carson's cost of care multipliers, I have determined that an award of <damage type = "future care">$ 8,000</damage> is fair and adequate.
(e) Special Damages
147  Ms. Gray seeks special damages in the amount of <damage type = "other">$6,275.51</damage>.
148  The Hospital argues that a small reduction of the component of her claim that covers ferry travel ought to be made to reflect the fact that she sometimes combined a trip to the lower mainland to attend medical appointments with visiting her family in Maple Ridge. I am satisfied that the primary purpose for the incurrence by Ms. Gray of the ferry fares was to attend legitimate medical appointments arising from her injuries related to the Injection. The fact that she elected to coordinate visits with her family during some of those trips, does not convert those expenditures into non-compensable damages.
149  Ms. Gray is awarded the sum <damage type = "special">$6,275.51</damage> for special damages.
(f) Other Matters
150  Ms. Gray's in-trust claim has not been proved and is dismissed.
151  In the event that the parties are unable to reach an agreement on costs, Ms. Gray's counsel is at liberty to file written submissions within 60 days of these reasons. Counsel for the Hospital is to file submissions in response within 45 days of receipt of plaintiff's submissions. Any reply submissions are to be filed within 15 days thereafter.
S.K. BALLANCE J.
End of Document
Kirkham v. Richardson, [2014] B.C.J. No. 1194
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
L.A. Warren J.
Heard: April 7-11, 14-16, 2014.
Judgment: June 13, 2014.
Docket: M121470
Registry: Vancouver
[2014] B.C.J. No. 1194   |
Between Amy Ashley Kirkham, Plaintiff, and Adam Sho Richardson, Defendant
(245 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Body injuries — Back and spine — Neck — Whiplash — Soft tissue — Fibromyalgia or chronic pain — Action by motorist for damages for injuries sustained in motor vehicle accident allowed — Plaintiff, a PhD student and aspiring professional triathlete, sustained soft tissue injuries to neck, shoulders and upper back and developed myofascial pain syndrome, chronic pain syndrome, cervical facet arthropathy and left hip girdle pain — Post-accident bike crash did not exacerbate injuries, but contributed to deconditioning and decision to not compete in triathlons — Plaintiff entitled to non-pecuniary damages of $120,000, $13,200 for past loss of income, $86,500 for loss of future earning capacity, $12,302 for costs of future care and special damages of $35,683.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Special damages — Past loss of income — Expenses and expenditures — Medical — Therapy or rehabilitation — Non-pecuniary loss — Action by motorist for damages for injuries sustained in motor vehicle accident allowed — Plaintiff, a PhD student and aspiring professional triathlete, sustained soft tissue injuries to neck, shoulders and upper back and developed myofascial pain syndrome, chronic pain syndrome, cervical facet arthropathy and left hip girdle pain — Post-accident bike crash did not exacerbate injuries, but contributed to deconditioning and decision to not compete in triathlons — Plaintiff entitled to non-pecuniary damages of <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$120,000</damage>, <damage type = "past wage loss">$13,200</damage> for past loss of income, <damage type = "future wage loss">$86,500</damage> for loss of future earning capacity, <damage type = "future care">$12,302</damage> for costs of future care and special damages of <damage type = "special">$35,683</damage>.
Action by a motorist for damages for personal injuries sustained in a car accident. In January 2011, the plaintiff collided with the defendant's vehicle when the defendant turned left in front of her. Shortly after the car accident, the plaintiff began feeling pain in her neck, shoulders and upper back and she developed a headache. She was eventually diagnosed with a whiplash associated disorder. She received massage therapy, physiotherapy and chiropractic treatments for her injuries. At the time of the accident, the plaintiff was 26 years of age. She was married with no children. She was an aspiring professional triathlete and a PhD student. She also worked as a teaching assistant. Prior to the accident, the plaintiff suffered some sports-related injuries, but nothing that prevented her from training. Following the accident, the plaintiff had trouble keep up with the readings for her courses and her school performance suffered. In addition, she found sitting at her computer, which she used for work, very painful. She took one week off from training after the accident, and then gradually because a reduced training regimen. In the three or four months post-accident, her condition improved, but did not resolve. In May 2011, the plaintiff crashed while competing in an Ironman race. She suffered road rash and a concussion, but did not experience any aggravation of her prior injuries. She took an 11-month leave of absence from her PhD studies in October 2011 and concentrated on recovery. She gradually resumed training and work, but later discontinued her athletic training to focus on her recovery and her studies. In addition to interfering with her school work and training, the plaintiff alleged that her injuries interfered with her ability to do household work and affected her relationship with her husband and friends. The plaintiff sought compensation for her personal injuries and the associated pain and suffering, past loss of income, future loss of income, cost of future care, special damages and costs. The defendant admitted liability and that the plaintiff suffered soft tissue injuries to her neck, but argued that her injuries were resolved when he recovery was complicated by injuries she suffered the bike crash following the accident and that any ongoing injuries were attributable to the bike crash. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 As a result of the car accident, the plaintiff suffered soft tissue injuries to her neck, shoulders and upper back and developed myofascial pain syndrome, chronic pain syndrome, cervical facet arthropathy and left hip girdle pain. Her injuries continued to affect her and forced her to give up her career as a professional athlete and delayed her PhD studies. The bike crash did not exacerbate her injuries and did not contribute to her various pain syndromes. However, the concussion the plaintiff sustained in the bike accident contributed to her deconditioning, which led to left hip girdle pain. In addition, it resulted in the plaintiff's decision to not compete in triathlons during the summer of 2011, but did not contribute to her decision to take a leave of absence from her studies. The plaintiff's injuries had a significant impact on her life, caused her intense pain and interfered with her relationships, her athletics and her studies. The plaintiff was entitled to non-pecuniary damages of <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$130,00</damage>, reduced by <damage type = "reduction">$10,000</damage> to reflect the possibility that deconditioning associated with the concussion caused some of her pain. In addition, the plaintiff was entitled to <damage type = "past wage loss">$13,200</damage> for past loss of income from being a teaching assistant and prize money and <damage type = "future wage loss">$86,500</damage> for loss of future earning capacity associated with the delay in her career and the loss of prize money. The plaintiff was also entitled to costs of future care of <damage type = "future care">$12,302</damage> for physiotherapy, massage therapy, chiropractic treatments, an athletic therapist, pain medications, an ergonomic assessment and yoga and special damages of <damage type = "special">$35,683</damage>.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Insurance (Vehicle) Act,
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: Ruth E. McIntyre, Cocuta Sirian.
Counsel for the Defendant: Matthew Hinton, Jonathan R. Wittig.
Reasons for Judgment
L.A. WARREN J.
INTRODUCTION
1  Amy Kirkham seeks damages for personal injuries she suffered in a car accident on January 5, 2011. She claims that she injured her neck, shoulders, upper back, and left hip in the accident, and that she now suffers from myofascial pain syndrome, cervical facet arthropathy, left hip girdle pain, and chronic pain syndrome, all of which has disabled her from competing as a professional triathlete and delayed her PhD studies by one year. She seeks compensation for her personal injuries and the associated pain and suffering, past loss of income, future loss of income, cost of future care, special damages, and costs.
2  Liability has been admitted. The defendant also admits that Ms. Kirkham suffered soft tissue strain to her neck in the car accident but takes the position that her injuries were resolving when her recovery was complicated by injuries she suffered in a bike crash while competing in a triathlon four and one-half months after the car accident, and that any ongoing symptoms and disability are attributable to the bike crash.
ISSUES
3  The primary issues are (1) causation with respect to the various injuries Ms. Kirkham claims she sustained in the car accident and which she asserts continue to affect her; (2) the impact, if any, of the subsequent bike crash on those injuries, and (3) the amount of damages to which she is entitled under various heads of damage.
BACKGROUND
Before the car accident
4  Ms. Kirkham was 26 years old at the time of the accident. She lives with her spouse, David Stephens, who is an elite cyclist. She has no children.
5  Ms. Kirkham is an accomplished young woman. In the years prior to the car accident, she pursued athletics and academics with uncommon discipline, dedication, and determination. At the time of the accident, she was an aspiring professional triathlete and a PhD student who effectively balanced her studies and her sport.
6  Ms. Kirkham graduated from York University in June 2008 with a Bachelor of Science degree in kinesiology. She then moved to Vancouver and completed a Master of Science degree in exercise psychology at UBC. In September 2010, Ms. Kirkham commenced her PhD studies in rehabilitation sciences at UBC. Her work is in the field of cardiovascular and exercise oncology, with a focus on the impact of breast cancer chemotherapy on the cardiovascular system.
7  At the time of the accident, Ms. Kirkham was four months into her PhD program. In addition to course work, she also worked as a teaching assistant. She devoted at least 40 hours per week to her PhD studies, with much of that time spent working on a computer. Dr. Kristin Campbell, a professor who supervised Ms. Kirkham's Master's Degree and is supervising her PhD, testified that Ms. Kirkham's performance during her Master's and the first term of her PhD was very good.
8  Ms. Kirkham has been a competitive runner since the age of 12. She was on the varsity running teams at York University and received several awards. She began competing in triathlons in 2007, eventually focussing on the half-Ironman distance, which consists of a 1.9 km swim, a 90 km cycle, and a 21.1 km run.
9  In 2009, Ms. Kirkham joined the Leading Edge Triathlon Club, a performance- oriented private club for triathletes, and started training under a coach named Alan Carlsson. Mr. Carlsson described Ms. Kirkham as a very motivated and professional athlete.
10  By 2010, Ms. Kirkham was competing as an elite triathlete, which meant she was eligible for prize money. In 2010, she had several podium performances (finishing in the top three) in half-Ironman races. She acknowledged that she had not yet arrived as one of Canada's leading triathletes but she was getting there. According to Mr. Carlsson, in 2010, Ms. Kirkham was moving into the top level of triathletes.
11  Encouraged by her success in 2010, Ms. Kirkham decided to try to qualify for the half-Ironman World Championship to be held in September 2011. To qualify, she had to accumulate points based on her performance in a series of half-Ironman races referred to as the "70.3 Series". She planned to compete in several 70.3 Series races in 2011, with the first scheduled for Puerto Rico in March.
12  Prior to the car accident, Ms. Kirkham was following an intense physical training regime. She devoted approximately 20 hours a week to a rigorous schedule of biking, swimming, running, and weight training. She trained six days a week, for up to five hours a day, split between a morning and evening workout.
13  In addition to training, Ms. Kirkham saw a chiropractor, Dr. Jonathan Gerrard, approximately three times a month for what Dr. Gerrard referred to as "performance care". He described this as consistent care directed at enhancing athletic performance and preventing injury by treating the subtle changes to the tissues that result from intensive physical training.
14  Prior to the car accident, Ms. Kirkham suffered some sports-related injuries but she never had an injury that prevented her from training. None of the medical experts considered Ms. Kirkham's pre-car-accident health to have contributed to the injuries she suffered in the car accident or to her current condition.
15  Prior to the car accident, Ms. Kirkham's social life revolved around her athletics, with most social occasions consisting of training with other high-level athletes. Ms. Kirkham's friends, Amy Schneeberg, Sabrina Wilkie, and Robert Johnson, described Ms. Kirkham as hard-working, driven, goal-oriented, motivated, confident, and incredibly fit. Ms. Schneeberg, a long-time runner and PhD student herself, testified that she and Ms. Kirkham would do 16 km runs together before school. Ms. Wilkie, an elite distance runner, described Ms. Kirkham as a "super keen" person, for whom school was the first priority and training a close second. Mr. Johnson, an elite triathlete who trained with Ms. Kirkham, described her as upbeat and committed to her sport.
16  As already noted, Ms. Kirkham's spouse, Mr. Stephens, is also an elite athlete. They met on an athletes' dating website. Prior to the accident, their lives were dedicated to sport and work. Mr. Stephens described Ms. Kirkham as intensely focused on her PhD studies and her triathlon training. They spent most of their time together participating in physical activities such as lengthy bike rides. Even their vacations revolved around athletics, including a trip spent cycling in the mountains in Spain.
The car accident: January 2011
17  At approximately 4:45 pm on January 5, 2011, Ms. Kirkham was driving westbound on West 16th Avenue in Vancouver on her way to a training session at UBC. She entered the intersection at Pine Street on a green light and the defendant, who was traveling eastbound on West 16th Avenue, turned left in front of her. The front of Ms. Kirkham's car hit the passenger side rear door of the defendant's car. Although Ms. Kirkham applied her brakes before the collision, the impact was sudden and hard. Ms. Kirkham was wearing her seatbelt. The airbags in Ms. Kirkham's car deployed.
18  Ms. Kirkham's car would not start following the accident and had to be towed away. Ms. Kirkham was driven home by a police officer. Ultimately, the car was written off.
Effects of the car accident: January to early May 2011
19  Shortly after the accident, Ms. Kirkham began feeling pain in her neck, shoulders, and upper back, and she developed a headache. The next day, the pain was more intense. She went to see Dr. Gerrard, who noted her chief complaints as right neck pain, bilateral posterior shoulder/upper trapezii pain, and mid-scapular pain. On examination, he noted tenderness, muscle spasm, increased muscle tone and taut bands in the neck, upper back and shoulder areas, and significantly reduced cervical range of motion in all six directions (flexion, extension, right rotation, left rotation, right lateral flexion, and left lateral flexion).
20  Dr. Gerrard administered two questionnaires, the Neck Disability Index and the Oswestry Low Back Pain Disability Index, which are intended to assess the degree to which pain is interfering with a patient's activities. Although both indices are based entirely on the patient's subjective responses to written questions, Dr. Gerrard considers them to be particularly useful for monitoring the progress of a patient's symptoms over time. Ms. Kirkham initially scored moderate to severe on the Neck Disability Index, which Dr. Gerrard calculated as a 50% disability. He calculated her low back disability at approximately 15% on the basis of the Oswestry Index.
21  In mid-January 2011, Dr. Gerrard recommended that Ms. Kirkham see a massage therapist and a physician. She started massage therapy with Tasha Stewart at UBC Massage Therapy Clinic and saw Dr. Hall, a general practitioner at a walk-in clinic. Dr. Hall recommended physiotherapy and Ms. Kirkham then started treatments at Treloar Physiotherapy.
22  Ms. Kirkham returned to the walk-in clinic approximately three weeks later and saw another general practitioner, Dr. Shiu. Dr. Shiu recommended that she continue with physiotherapy, massage therapy, and chiropractic treatments, and he also prescribed a muscle relaxant. Ms. Kirkham followed Dr. Shiu's recommendations.
23  Ms. Kirkham struggled after the accident to keep up with the weekly readings for the two courses she was enrolled in. Her work required her to sit at a computer for significant periods of time and this was very painful. She made some adjustments to her equipment (for example, raising her laptop to eye level, getting a wireless keyboard and mouse, and raising her chair) in order to minimize the pain.
24  Ms. Kirkham took approximately one week off from training after the accident, and then gradually began again with a much-reduced regime. About a week after the accident, she started some indoor cycling sessions, which were much easier on her neck than outdoor riding because she could sit more upright and keep her neck in one position. Shortly after starting the indoor cycling, Ms. Kirkham added light swimming at about half the intensity that she had been doing before the accident and with frequent breaks. She modified her swim stroke to accommodate her neck pain and had to refrain from flip turns for a year because it prevented her from tucking her chin into the required position. At about the beginning of March 2011, Ms. Kirkham returned to gentle running, beginning slowly on a treadmill and gradually increasing her running time.
25  Ms. Kirkham got a new bike after the accident and had it modified to accommodate her modified position. She testified that since the accident, her left hip had been twisted forward and this necessitated adjustments because one foot rested further forward than the other.
26  During the three to four months following the accident, Ms. Kirkham's condition improved but did not resolve. She continued to have recurring pain in her neck, shoulders, and upper back. The physiotherapy, massage therapy, chiropractic treatments, and medication provided some relief but the pain interfered with her studies and her training. She was emotional and irritable from the pain and from her inability to train at her previous intensity.
27  A symptom diary that Ms. Kirkham kept indicates that she did have, even in January 2011, some good days. For example, the diary entry for January 15 states that she did a 70-minute bike workout in her aerobars (extended handlebars used by bike racers that reduce the rider's wind profile by lowering the rider's torso and keeping the rider's elbows in close to the body) without pain, but also without looking up. However, the diary also indicates she had very significant pain on January 17, 18, and 19, and she could not use the aerobars during a bike workout on January 23.
28  Mr. Carlsson testified that during the three to four months following the accident, Ms. Kirkham complained a lot about neck and back pain, which he said affected her posture and technique. He said her training progressed gradually over this period, but she was nowhere near where she had been before the accident in terms of intensity, volume, and technique.
29  Notwithstanding her pain, Ms. Kirkham assumed she would get better and was still hoping to accumulate the points she needed to qualify for the World Championship in September 2011. She persevered and continued to increase the volume and intensity of her workouts, most often working through the pain.
30  Ms. Kirkham cancelled a half marathon that she had planned to run in Vancouver in February. She also cancelled the 70.3 Series half-Ironman in Puerto Rico in March. However, after discussions with Dr. Gerrard, Ms. Kirkham decided to compete in a 70.3 Series half-Ironman in April 2011 in New Orleans.
31  Mr. Carlsson encouraged Ms. Kirkham to enter races in the spring of 2011. He described Ms. Kirkham as "competition-oriented" and said she needed the competition to stay motivated. He said the goal for the New Orleans race was just to finish it.
32  Ms. Kirkham saw a chiropractor in New Orleans before the race who taped her neck, which is something she had never done before. The swim portion of the New Orleans race was canceled due to high winds. The cycling portion was relatively easy and flat, but, during the final 45 minutes, Ms. Kirkham experienced significant neck pain and could see her power output dropping significantly. The pain was relieved when she started the running portion. Her symptoms did not worsen following the race, notwithstanding the pain she felt while cycling.
33  Ms. Kirkham's cycling and running times in New Orleans were similar to the times she had posted in half-Ironman events in 2010. Ms. Kirkham testified that in the circumstances, she was happy with her performance. However, she emphasized that she had been improving consistently at a rapid rate in all three triathlon disciplines in 2010. She considered she had a lot of potential for additional improvement and believed she would have significantly improved her times had it not been for the car accident.
34  Ms. Kirkham switched physiotherapists after the New Orleans race and started seeing Marilou Lamy on a weekly basis. On the first visit, on April 26, 2011, Ms. Kirkham told Ms. Lamy that although she considered herself approximately 50% recovered, she was not satisfied with her progress, she could not perform at the same training level as before the car accident, and she had difficulty sitting at the computer.
35  On examination, Ms. Lamy noted upper facet joint dysfunction of the upper cervical region as well as the mid/lower cervical area, with what she referred to as a link to the right shoulder and arm causing discomfort in those areas, and some neural tension. Ms. Lamy also noted restricted mobility in Ms. Kirkham's thoracic spine and left hip that seemed related to her neck in that when she worked on improving the mobility in the thoracic spine and hip area it also improved the neck mobility.
36  Ms. Lamy said that she thought not enough had been done to improve the strength and endurance in the muscles of Ms. Kirkham's neck, upper back, and pelvis and so she recommended Ms. Kirkham commence Pilates with a colleague named Stephanie McCann. Ms. Lamy and Ms. McCann worked together to tailor a program designed to increase Ms. Kirkham's muscular control.
37  On May 5, 2011, Ms. Kirkham started seeing Dr. D.R. Lloyd-Smith, a general practitioner specializing in sports medicine. Dr. Lloyd-Smith testified that when he first saw Ms. Kirkham, she told him that she had gradually increased her training to about 15 to 18 hours per week but was continuing to have pain. He diagnosed Ms. Kirkham with a whiplash associated disorder grade 2 with myofascial pain syndrome and recommended trigger point analgesic injections. Ms. Kirkham felt immediate relief upon receiving the first injections on May 6, 2011, lasting as much as a couple of weeks.
38  Ms. Kirkham's performance at school suffered immediately following the car accident. Dr. Campbell testified that in the period from January to April 2011, Ms. Kirkham was not physically present as much as she had been in the first term. Also, in Dr. Campbell's view, Ms. Kirkham was not making adequate progress with her main project and was missing deadlines. Dr. Campbell characterized Ms. Kirkham's performance during this time as unacceptable and out of character. She scheduled a meeting with Ms. Kirkham for May 26, 2011, to discuss Ms. Kirkham's performance in anticipation of submitting a formal annual progress report on Ms. Kirkham to UBC.
The bike crash: May 2011
39  Although Ms. Kirkham was still suffering from pain that impeded her training, she decided to participate in two half-Ironman races in May 2011. She said she made this decision after finding that her symptoms did not worsen after the New Orleans race. Dr. Gerrard, Dr. Lloyd-Smith, and Mr. Carlsson all supported this decision.89
40  Ms. Kirkham achieved a personal best time in the swim portion of the first race in Spain; however, her neck pain was very bad during the last hour of the cycling portion. Still, she recovered well following this race and was optimistic about the next one.
41  The second race was in Austria. The swim portion went well, but she suffered significant neck pain from the beginning of the cycling. She swerved while trying to pass another cyclist and crashed. She estimates she was traveling approximately 40 km/hour at the time of the fall. She hit her head and has no memory of the fall itself. She was taken to hospital by ambulance, where she remained overnight. She had road rash on her left shoulder, left chin, cheekbone, and neck, and was diagnosed as having suffered a concussion. She said she was initially concerned that she may have aggravated her neck and upper back injury and was relieved when she did not feel any change in her neck and upper back symptoms following the crash.
42  Ms. Kirkham left the hospital the day after the fall. She and Mr. Stephens spent a couple of days being tourists, as originally planned, and then returned to Vancouver. Mr. Stephens testified that during this time Ms. Kirkham had a bit of a headache, but she was generally fine and did not complain about any increased neck pain.
After the bike crash
43  On May 26, 2011, the day after she returned to Vancouver, Ms. Kirkham saw both Dr. Gerrard and Dr. Lloyd-Smith. Dr. Gerrard performed a neurological exam, palpated Ms. Kirkham's neck area, and did range of motion testing. He said he did not find any significant change to her car accident related injuries. Dr. Lloyd-Smith testified he found nothing new on physical examination to suggest the bike crash significantly affected her neck.
44  Also on May 26, 2011, Ms. Kirkham met with Dr. Campbell in anticipation of Dr. Campbell submitting an annual progress report on Ms. Kirkham to UBC. At the meeting, Dr. Campbell told Ms. Kirkham about her concerns regarding Ms. Kirkham's performance, which were subsequently reflected in the report she submitted in early June. Ms. Kirkham was devastated by Dr. Campbell's assessment. She said she had never had a bad report in her entire life.
45  After about a week off training immediately following the bike crash, Ms. Kirkham then commenced a regime significantly decreased due to her concussion symptoms. Between May and July 2011, she focused on indoor cycling. She resumed track running in August 2011. She did not compete in any races for the balance of 2011.
46  In June 2011, Ms. Kirkham was feeling depressed about the persistence of the neck pain and about having to significantly decrease her training and cancel a race due to the concussion. Dr. Lloyd-Smith suggested she see a counselor at UBC. Ms. Kirkham saw the counselor three times because that was the maximum number of visits UBC would provide.
47  In July 2011, on Dr. Lloyd-Smith's advice, Ms. Kirkham went to GF Strong Rehabilitation Centre, where she received some guidance for managing concussion symptoms. It was suggested that she take some time off her studies but she testified that by this time she felt that her concussion symptoms were on the way to resolution. Although she did not take any time off from her studies, her progress slowed over the summer due to her headaches and concentration difficulties.
48  Over the summer of 2011, Ms. Kirkham continued her physiotherapy, chiropractic treatments, massage therapy, and trigger point injections. She said her neck and shoulder symptoms remained about the same as they had been prior to the crash. Her concussion symptoms resolved.
49  Ms. Kirkham testified that she became overwhelmed in September 2011. The concussion symptoms had resolved but the injuries she sustained in the car accident were not improving. She was experiencing daily pain, which was exacerbated by working at the computer. She had not been working as a teaching assistant between January and September 2011, but returned to teaching in September which increased the demands on her time. She was continuing to attend many physiotherapy, chiropractic, and massage therapy sessions each week, which was time consuming. Her practitioners were recommending that she take on additional rehabilitation such as yoga but she had no time to do it. She was still feeling disappointed by Dr. Campbell's progress report. At an appointment with Dr. Lloyd-Smith in October she broke down.
50  Dr. Lloyd-Smith thought Ms. Kirkham's stress was impeding the healing of her neck injury. He said she needed to reduce her computer use because it exacerbated the neck pain. He recommended she take a leave of absence from school. Ms. Kirkham discussed the idea with Dr. Campbell and another academic mentor, both of whom were supportive. With that support, Ms. Kirkham reluctantly applied for and received permission to take a leave of absence from her PhD program from October 2011 to April 2012.
51  During the leave of absence, Ms. Kirkham considered the rehabilitation of her neck and back injury to be her job. She spent hours doing yoga, stretching, and strength training. She continued regular physiotherapy and chiropractic treatments and appointments with Dr. Lloyd-Smith. She reduced her computer use to a couple of hours per week.
52  In November 2011, Ms. Kirkham became ill with pneumonia. She was bed-ridden for two to three weeks and suffered lingering symptoms for a further few weeks. After she recovered from the pneumonia, she noticed that her pain seemed quite a bit better.
53  Ms. Kirkham said that by about January 2012 she was feeling quite well. Dr. Gerrard noted that by January 2012 her cervical range of motion had recovered in all directions except cervical extension.
54  In early 2012, Ms. Kirkham returned to some training with Mr. Carlsson. She started with cycling and, by February 2012, was doing about five hours a week of swimming, cycling, and running. She then suffered a flare-up of her neck symptoms. In April, on Dr. Lloyd-Smith's recommendation, she increased the dosage of her pain killers in the hope that it would allow her to increase her training volume and intensity. She gradually increased her training schedule through the spring; however, as noted by Dr. Lloyd-Smith, she then developed some left lateral knee and left hip pain.
55  In April 2012, Dr. Lloyd-Smith recommended that Ms. Kirkham extend her leave of absence for another term to the end of August 2012. He felt she had made progress but was not physically ready to go back to intense computer work. Ms. Kirkham was reluctant, but extended her leave of absence to September 2012.
56  Because she was concerned about having to suddenly return to her studies in September on a full-time basis, Ms. Kirkham took it upon herself to resume some computer work in May 2012. She gradually increased her computer use until August 2012, when she was managing four hours a day without any significant pain.
57  Ms. Kirkham continued to increase her training volume and intensity over the summer of 2012. She participated in a few races but no triathlons. She had some very good days but also days when the pain was bad, particularly when she pushed hard in workouts. She was still having difficulty sustaining the proper drop position while cycling, which required her neck to be extended for lengthy periods of time.
58  By August or September 2012, Ms. Kirkham was training at a level close to her pre-accident level. Dr. Lloyd-Smith's clinical record of September 27, 2012, indicates that Ms. Kirkham reported being pain-free 80% of the time. However, she could not get down into her aerobars while cycling and had difficulty looking up while swimming.
59  Mr. Carlsson testified that throughout 2012 it was apparent that Ms. Kirkham was still dealing with a lot of neck and back pain. He said her hours per week of training were inconsistent. When the pain increased, she had to reduce the training. He characterized her progress as one step forward, two steps back, two steps forward, one step back. Even though she was close to her pre-accident volumes of training, he considered that there was no noticeable pattern of improvement in her performance.
60  Mr. Stephens' evidence about Ms. Kirkham's progress throughout 2012 was similar to that of Mr. Carlsson. He testified that Ms. Kirkham did get back to a training volume that approached her pre-accident level but he said it went in waves. She would get the volume up and then have a flare-up in pain and decrease her training again.
61  Ms. Kirkham returned to her PhD studies on a full-time basis in September 2012. However, she became exhausted and discouraged by what she considered to be a lack of improvement in her athletic performance given she was back to her regular training volumes. In October or November 2012, she started having more significant hip pain.
62  In the fall of 2012, Ms. Kirkham started seeing another physiotherapist named Mr. Sean Campbell, who specializes in rehabilitating high level athletes. Mr. Campbell focused on reprogramming the ways Ms. Kirkham uses her muscles when she moves, which addresses the compensatory strategies she has developed as a result of the pain from her injuries. Mr. Campbell has also treated Ms. Kirkham with manual therapy, intramuscular stimulation or IMS (a needling technique similar to acupuncture), exercise, and taping. He testified that she has responded favourably to this treatment.
63  In the fall of 2012, Mr. Campbell and Ms. Lamy recommended that Ms. Kirkham stop her triathlon training and restrict her physical activities to physiotherapy, yoga, Pilates, and strength training. Mr. Campbell referred to this as a "therapeutic regime" to gradually increase her tolerance for both work and athletics. Dr. Lloyd-Smith agreed with this approach. Ms. Kirkham followed this recommendation, concluding she could no longer manage both her studies and the intense training required of an elite athlete.
64  Ms. Kirkham testified that she has been quite successful in her studies since giving up training and is on track to finish her PhD in August 2015. Dr. Campbell said Ms. Kirkham's performance in her studies since September 2012 has been very good.
65  On Ms. Lamy's recommendation, and with Dr. Lloyd-Smith's support, Ms. Kirkham saw a sports psychologist three times in late 2013. She canceled her last scheduled appointment with him as she felt she had made a fair amount of progress.
66  Ms. Kirkham testified that the injuries she suffered in the car accident not only affected her academics and athletics but also affected daily activities such as grocery shopping and homemaking. She said she still finds it difficult to lift things like grocery bags and laundry. She testified that she could not even do the dishes for the first couple of years following the accident, but as her pain has become more manageable, she has resumed some of these activities. She still avoids lifting because it causes pain.
67  Ms. Kirkham testified that the accident has affected her relationship with Mr. Stephens. She explained that she has been concerned that his feelings towards her will change because she has changed so dramatically. A passion for high level athletics is what originally brought them together. He had started dating a woman who was extremely athletic, confident, focused, and driven, and she has become someone else entirely. Her confidence suffered, her body image suffered, she was often emotionally upset, and this affected their relationship. While Ms. Kirkham's triathlon career suffered and ultimately came to an end, Mr. Stephens was excelling in his cycling career, and Ms. Kirkham had to work hard not to resent his success. He continues to train four to five hours on Saturday and Sunday mornings and she is left at home alone. Ms. Kirkham testified that both she and Mr. Stephens are not particularly interested in doing things for fun. They both wanted to focus on becoming the best at something. He is continuing to pursue that goal and she has been left behind.
68  Ms. Kirkham has been able to pursue some recreational activities, including recreational cycling. In December 2012, while on vacation with Mr. Stephens, Ms. Kirkham cycled up Mount Haleakal? on Maui, a 56 km "hill climb", which took about four hours. She explained that one sits more upright when cycling uphill and this is much easier on her neck. Because she is unable to sustain the bent-over body position that is required when racing or cycling downhill, Ms. Kirkham only cycled up Mount Haleakal?. Mr. Stephens met her at the top to drive her back down. In May 2013, Ms. Kirkham and Mr. Stephens spent six days at Mount Hood in Oregon, where they cycled and hiked.
69  Ms. Kirkham testified that the injuries she suffered in the accident have affected her relationships with her friends. She explained that all her friends are athletes and their time together was spent in athletic pursuits, particularly running. Her friends still plan trail runs and other adventurous activities, and Ms. Kirkham is left out. Ms. Kirkham's evidence in this regard was corroborated by her friends Ms. Schneeberg, Mr. Johnson, and Ms. Wilkie, who also testified about the changes they have witnessed in Ms. Kirkham's personality, from confident and upbeat to emotional and depressed.
70  Ms. Kirkham testified that it is hard for her to remain optimistic that she will ever compete in triathlon again. It has been more than three years since the accident and she finds it difficult to imagine she could ever return to compete at her previous level after losing that time.
71  At present, Ms. Kirkham's neck, shoulder, and upper back pain is manageable if she restricts her computer work to a normal workweek. Her pain flares up if she has to spend more than about ten hours a day at her computer, and also if she works at a location other than the office workstation that has been specifically configured. She resumed some track running in January 2014, but it exacerbated her pain. She continues to suffer from hip pain.
72  Ms. Kirkham continues to work with and follow the advice of Ms. Lamy and Mr. Campbell. She has reduced her chiropractic care because Mr. Campbell recommended greater focus on active treatments. She continues to participate in yoga, Pilates, strength training, and some track running and sees Dr. Lloyd-Smith for trigger point injections. She takes pain killers and muscle relaxants as prescribed by Dr. Lloyd-Smith.
73  Ms. Kirkham remains optimistic about her future academic life. Upon completing her PhD, she plans to do two or three years of postdoctoral study and then apply for a professorship.
MEDICAL EVIDENCE
74  Ms. Kirkham relied on medical reports written by Dr. Heather Finlayson (who conducted an independent medical examination of Ms. Kirkham at the request of Ms. Kirkham's counsel) and her treating practitioners, Dr. Lloyd-Smith, Dr. Gerrard, Ms. Lamy, and Mr. Campbell, each of whom also testified at trial. The defendant relied on medical reports written by Dr. Marc Boyle, who conducted an independent medical examination of Ms. Kirkham at the request of counsel for the defendant, and who testified via video deposition. A summary of the medical evidence is set out below.
Dr. Heather Finlayson
75  Dr. Finlayson is a specialist in physical medicine and rehabilitation. She also has a Diploma in sport medicine. She is a staff physician for the GF Strong Rehabilitation Centre Neuromusculoskeletal Rehabilitation Program, a consultant at Vancouver General Hospital, and a Clinical Assistant Professor in the UBC Faculty of Medicine. She is trained in the diagnosis, medical management, and rehabilitation of persons with spinal cord injury, acquired brain injury, general medical disorders, neurologic disorders, amputation, arthritis, soft tissue injuries, and musculoskeletal pain syndromes.
76  On November 21, 2013, Dr. Finlayson interviewed Ms. Kirkham and conducted a physical examination. She also reviewed the medical reports of Dr. Lloyd-Smith, Dr. Gerrard, and Ms. Lamy. It is Dr. Finlayson's opinion that as a result of the car accident, Ms. Kirkham is suffering from myofascial pain syndrome, cervical facet arthropathy, left hip girdle pain, and chronic pain syndrome.
77  Myofascial pain syndrome is a form of soft tissue injury where pain originates in muscles, tendons, ligaments, and fascia. Dr. Finlayson testified that this diagnosis was supported both by Ms. Kirkham's history of pain and stiffness beginning after the accident and by her own physical examination. Dr. Finlayson found taut bands of muscle in Ms. Kirkham's shoulder and neck areas on palpation, which Dr. Finlayson referred to as trigger points. She noted that Ms. Kirkham's positive response to trigger point injections supported her diagnosis of myofascial pain syndrome.
78  Cervical facet arthropathy is a condition in which pain originates in the facet joints of the neck. Dr. Finlayson testified that whiplash is a common cause of cervical facet arthropathy, as the movement of the neck causes strain on these small joints. She testified that the small ligaments become injured, leading to microscopic inflammation that is not visible on an x-ray. She said this condition is distinct from arthritis, which generally refers to changes to the joints themselves such as narrowing caused by wear and tear. She testified that cervical facet arthropathy can trigger myofascial pain syndrome.
79  Left hip girdle pain is pain from a muscle that extends across the buttock, from the base of the spine to the left side of the hip, and pain and tightness in a tendon that extends from the muscles around the hip down the side of the leg to the knee. Dr. Finlayson testified that this diagnosis is supported by Ms. Kirkham's subjective reports of pain and Dr. Finlayson's physical examination, during which she found tightness in this muscle and tendon complex. Dr. Finlayson's opinion is that Ms. Kirkham's left hip girdle pain "is probably a direct consequence of deconditioning, i.e., reduced strength and muscular endurance as a result of her reduced activity level following the MVA".
80  Dr. Finlayson's diagnosis of chronic pain syndrome was based on Ms. Kirkham's history of pain lasting for greater than three to six months that is associated with decreased mood.
81  In Dr. Finlayson's opinion, the car accident was "the primary material contributor" to each of these diagnoses and the bike crash was not a significant contributor. Her opinion was based primarily on the history relayed by Ms. Kirkham and the medical reports indicating that the neck, shoulder and upper back pain symptoms began following the car accident and were not worsened after the bike crash.
82  In cross-examination, Dr. Finlayson expressed the opinion that the forces that would be expected to pass through the neck following a car accident are different from the forces that would be expected to pass through the neck following a direct trauma to the head. Dr. Finlayson acknowledged that she does not know how Ms. Kirkham fell off her bike in Austria but maintained that a direct trauma to the head, alone, would not involve the same mechanism of injury as the car accident. I did not take Dr. Finlayson to be ruling out the possibility of a whiplash injury in a bike crash. Rather, I took her to be saying that the fact Ms. Kirkham suffered a concussion in the bike crash would not, without more, support a finding that the crash aggravated her neck injury.
83  Dr. Finlayson's prognosis is that it is "improbable that Ms. Kirkham will be able to resume her previous level of triathlon training and competition" and it is "improbable that she will achieve the same level of success and be able to gain sponsorship [as a triathlete] as she would have prior to the MVA". However, she was also of the view that there is potential for improvement in Ms. Kirkham's pain and her ability to engage in recreational level sports with continued physiotherapy at least one to two times per month (and perhaps up to four times per month) for the next year, assistance from a personal trainer or athletic therapist to oversee her training program for at least the next year, psychological support, and an ergonomic assessment of her home-based workstation. If there is no improvement in the left hip girdle pain with ongoing rehabilitation, then consideration should be given to corticosteroid injections and/or Botox injections. She also testified that it is not enough for Ms. Kirkham to exercise alone, and that she continues to require regular guidance from professionals.
84  The defendant raised many issues regarding Dr. Finlayson's evidence. I have considered all of them and none, in my view, detracts from the weight to be accorded to Dr. Finlayson's evidence. I will address some of those issues specifically.
85  First, the defendant submitted that Dr. Finlayson's report does not distinguish her opinion from Ms. Kirkham's version of what caused the complaints and injuries, because the instruction letter from Ms. Kirkham's counsel asked Dr. Finlayson to include in her report the history as relayed by Ms. Kirkham. I do not agree. There is nothing objectionable about counsel's request. A medical report like the one prepared by Dr. Finlayson must be based, in part, on the patient's subjective history. I note that counsel for the defendant told Dr. Boyle, in his letter, that he "may wish to append" to his report a "detailed account of interviews you have had with the plaintiff". There is no material difference between the two instructions. Further, and more fundamentally, Dr. Finlayson's report clearly distinguishes between her opinion, which is in the body of her report, and the history as relayed by Ms. Kirkham, which is contained in an appendix.
86  Second, the defendant pointed out that Dr. Finlayson relied on the reports of Ms. Kirkham's treating practitioners but was not provided with their clinical records. As a result, her opinions depend upon the accuracy of those reports. While this is true, the reports Dr. Finlayson relied upon were not shown to be inaccurate in any material way. For example, a form prepared by Dr. Gerrard for ICBC outlines dates that he provided treatment to Ms. Kirkham prior to the car accident. Dr. Gerrard explained that he did not include dates after May 2010 because he ran out of space on the form. The defendant submitted that this provided a skewed view to Dr. Finlayson because Dr. Gerrard treated Ms. Kirkham regularly up to December 2010. However, Dr. Finlayson also had access to Dr. Gerrard's report dated September 14, 2012, which expressly states that he treated Ms. Kirkham between March 2009 and December 2010. In any event, all the doctors, including Dr. Boyle, agreed that Ms. Kirkham had no significant pre-existing injuries. Thus, whether or not Ms. Kirkham saw Dr. Gerrard in the months just prior to the car accident is immaterial.
87  Third, the defendant notes that Dr. Finlayson did not have access to the diagnostic imaging reports that showed no evidence of clinically significant arthropathy. However, Dr. Finlayson's evidence was that her diagnosis of cervical facet arthropathy referred to microscopic inflammation that is not visible on an x-ray.
88  Finally, the defendant notes that Dr. Finlayson's diagnosis of myofascial pain syndrome was stated to be supported by Ms. Kirkham's positive response to trigger point injections. The defendant submits that Dr. Finlayson could not have known when the first of those injections were performed (and thus could not conclude that the bike crash was not a significant contributor to the pain) as the date was not indicated in Dr. Lloyd-Smith's report. However, Dr. Finlayson's report expressly notes that Ms. Kirkham told her that Dr. Lloyd-Smith performed the injections on several occasions starting "in about May 2011". The first trigger point injections were done on May 6, 2011.
Dr. D.R. Lloyd-Smith
89  Dr. Lloyd-Smith is a general practitioner specializing in sports medicine. He completed a sports medicine fellowship in 1983 and a diploma of sports and exercise medicine in 1985. He works as a sports medicine physician at the student health clinic and at a sports medicine centre at UBC. He is also a clinical professor in the Division of Sport and Exercise Medicine in the Department of Family Practice at UBC.
90  Dr. Lloyd-Smith has been Ms. Kirkham's treating physician since May 5, 2011. He diagnosed her with whiplash associated disorder grade 2 and myofascial pain syndrome as a result of the car accident and treated her with trigger point injections.
91  In Dr. Lloyd-Smith's opinion, the bike crash was not a significant contributor to Ms. Kirkham's ongoing symptoms. His opinion was based on the fact that once Ms. Kirkham's concussion symptoms improved, she returned to the same condition he had noted when he saw her on May 5, 2011. In cross-examination, he acknowledged that neck pain frequently co-exists with concussion, but denied that whiplash and concussion have similar mechanisms of injury. He said it is possible that a fall involving a concussion could also cause a neck injury, but maintained his view, based on her subjective report and his own physical examination after the bike crash, that Ms. Kirkham's neck injury was not aggravated by the crash.
92  Dr. Lloyd-Smith's prognosis is that Ms. Kirkham will return to pain-free normal daily activity and variable but manageable pain associated with her studies. In his view, she cannot pursue both the PhD and the elite level training she engaged in before the car accident. He considers it possible that once she completes her PhD and is no longer required to spend so many hours on the computer, she could return to unlimited sport, but he also said that with the loss of at least four years while she completes her PhD, it is unlikely that she will return to her status as a professional triathlete.
93  In addition to physiotherapy, massage therapy, chiropractic care, and analgesic medication, Dr. Lloyd-Smith recommended Ms. Kirkham continue with IMS treatments and trigger point injections. He did not provide a recommended timeframe for these treatments to continue because, in his view, the settling of myofascial pain syndrome is so variable. He also expressed the view that it is important for Ms. Kirkham to maintain her fitness, strength, flexibility, and balance through yoga and/or Pilates.
Dr. Jonathan Gerrard
94  Dr. Gerrard is a chiropractor with a special interest in the fields of repetitive strain injuries and soft tissue injuries. He also has expertise in biomechanics. Approximately 50% of his practice consists of treating elite athletes.
95  Dr. Gerrard started treating Ms. Kirkham before the car accident for performance care and continued after for injury rehabilitation. He examined her on January 6, 2011, the day after the accident, and found a significant alteration in Ms. Kirkham's tissue texture within the cervicothoracic paraspinal muscles with evident muscle spasm, taut bands, and spinal stiffness. He continued treating her regularly until June 2013.
96  It is Dr. Gerrard's opinion that Ms. Kirkham sustained a chronic type III (front impact), grade III (moderate severity) whiplash injury to the cervicothoracic spine and in particular to her cervical thoracic facet joints in the car accident. He testified that women with long slender necks are predisposed to more significant whiplash injury.
97  Dr. Gerrard used two indices to monitor Ms. Kirkham's progress between January 2011 and March 2013. The Neck Disability Index shows marked improvement in Ms. Kirkham's neck disability between January and March 2011, from 50% disability to about 12%, followed by a series of more moderate peaks and valleys. Since August 2012, Ms. Kirkham's neck disability scores have remained fairly constant at about 10%. The Oswestry Index shows more gradual but also variable improvement, starting at about 15% disability in January 2011, decreasing (though not steadily) to zero disability in August 2011, and remaining at about 4% from February 2012 to March 2013.
98  Dr. Gerrard also monitored Ms. Kirkham's progress over time by measuring her cervical range of motion. As already noted, by January 2012, the range of motion had recovered in five of the six directions. The sixth, cervical extension, was close to normal in August 2012, but returned to a slightly negative variance in April 2013.
99  In Dr. Gerrard's opinion, the bike crash did not result in any significant change to Ms. Kirkham's car accident related symptoms. He based this opinion on his examination of Ms. Kirkham after the crash and the fact that his findings remained unchanged.
100  In cross-examination, Dr. Gerrard expressed the opinion that Ms. Kirkham slid off her bike when she crashed, though he acknowledged that he does not actually know how she fell. This opinion was based on the speed at which Ms. Kirkham was traveling just prior to the crash (approximately 40 km/h), the fact that she was going around a left turn, and that she suffered abrasions on the left side of her body. He said that during a slide there is more time to decelerate and the mechanism of injury would be different than it was in the car accident. As with Dr. Finlayson's evidence, I did not take Dr. Gerrard to be saying that it is impossible to suffer a soft tissue neck injury in a bike fall. I took him to be saying that because of the different mechanisms of injury involved in the two kinds of impact, it would be wrong to infer a soft tissue neck injury solely from the fact that Ms. Kirkham fell off a bike and suffered a concussion.
101  In Dr. Gerrard's opinion, Ms. Kirkham has a poor prognosis for full recovery. In his view, she will have ongoing chronic intermittent upper back pain with neck stiffness, especially if participating in a rigorous training regime.
102  Dr. Gerrard recommended ongoing multidisciplinary care including physiotherapy twice a month, massage therapy every two to three weeks, and continued trigger point injections. He also recommended she resume monthly chiropractic care once the physiotherapy goals have been achieved. In his view, passive treatments such as massage and chiropractic care are required because the muscles that move the facet joints are small and not voluntarily controlled.
103  The defendant submitted that Dr. Gerrard was biased in favour of Ms. Kirkham and "injected advocacy" in his reports. For example, defence counsel suggested that in both the Austrian bike crash and a previous one, Ms. Kirkham fell from her bike on the left side and hit her head, and that Dr. Gerrard "refused to acknowledge even these common elements". This mischaracterizes Dr. Gerrard's evidence. He did acknowledge these common elements. He did not acknowledge that both bike crashes would necessarily involve the same mechanism of injury because, as he explained, he knew Ms. Kirkham was going around a bend in the Austrian crash and the speed at which she was traveling, while he did not know similar details about the other crash.
104  Dr. Gerrard knew Ms. Kirkham well, having treated her on a regular basis since 2009. He was well positioned to testify about her condition after the car accident, the progress in her condition up to May 2011, her condition after the bike crash, and her progression since then. I found him to be a careful and precise witness and do not consider any of the criticisms levelled by counsel for the defendant to undermine his credibility or the weight to be given to his evidence.
Ms. Marilou Lamy
105  Ms. Lamy is a registered physiotherapist with 20 years' experience in private practice. She has a Bachelor's degree in physiotherapy, a graduate diploma in manual therapy, and a diploma in sport physiotherapy. She has worked with the Canadian National Track and Field Team, including at many major events such as the Olympics, the World Championships, the Commonwealth Games, and the Pan-American Games.
106  Ms. Lamy's treatments, beginning in April 2011, have focused on regaining mobility and control in Ms. Kirkham's neck, upper back, and hip. She has employed various types of manual therapy techniques, myofascial release, deep tissue release, IMS, and postural awareness exercises.
107  It is Ms. Lamy's opinion that Ms. Kirkham's improvement has been significant but is not complete. In her view, Ms. Kirkham has returned to a functional level with respect to the activities of daily living and to a normal level of work in her PhD studies, but is not able to resume her pre-accident training load. In her view, it is possible that Ms. Kirkham will continue to gain mobility, strength, and flexibility.
108  In Ms. Lamy's opinion, Ms. Kirkham requires ongoing physiotherapy treatment twice monthly, gradually decreasing to once per month. She testified that while she initially planned to help Ms. Kirkham develop some "self-management strategies" she has come to the view, over time, that Ms. Kirkham requires one-on-one supervision.
109  Counsel for the defendant submitted that Ms. Lamy's evidence ought to be given little weight because, among other things, she made changes to her report that, in the defendant's view, were intended to downplay the role of Ms. Kirkham's concussion in her progress or to downplay her progress overall. For example, in an earlier version of her report, Ms. Lamy stated that Ms. Kirkham "had difficulty progressing after that bike crash and struggled to manage work and training due to the head injury". Ms. Lamy deleted the words "due to the head injury" in her subsequent report. She explained she had done so because she did not consider herself qualified to express an opinion regarding the reason for Ms. Kirkham's struggle to manage her work and training.
110  The earlier version of Ms. Lamy's report contained the sentence "By December 2011, she had returned to a decent level of training" and, later, "She had pneumonia in December and it set her back as she was not able to return to any type of sport and activities until mid-January 2012". The final version of the report does not include those sentences. Instead, it says: "She continued during that time to increase her training load and it was going well until November 2011 when she had pneumonia."
111  In my view, the differences in the two versions of Ms. Lamy's report are not material. Further, I accept her explanation that no one influenced her to make the changes and that the changes were prompted by her concern to not overstate and to restrict herself to expressing opinions only within her expertise. I do not consider any of the matters identified by counsel for the defendant with regard to Ms. Lamy's evidence or her report to undermine her credibility or the weight to be given to the opinions she expressed.
Mr. Sean Campbell
112  Mr. Campbell is a registered physiotherapist. He has a Master's Degree in physiotherapy and exercise science. Ms. Kirkham has been seeing Mr. Campbell at least once a month and sometimes two or three times a month since the fall of 2012.
113  It is Mr. Campbell's opinion that Ms. Kirkham has developed compensatory strategies in the way she uses her muscles to support herself when engaged in various activities and that these compensatory strategies exacerbate her symptoms. For example, he explained that when sitting and cycling, she engages her neck and shoulder muscles to support her position which results in cervical and upper thoracic compression. He has employed treatments such as manual therapy, IMS, exercise, and taping in an effort to restore normal patterns and increase kinesthetic awareness.
114  In Mr. Campbell's opinion, given Ms. Kirkham's progress to date, the consistent exacerbating factors in her symptomology and the physical requirements of her training regime, it is unlikely that she will return to competitive triathlon.
115  In Mr. Campbell's view, Ms. Kirkham requires ongoing treatment, similar to what she is currently receiving, at least for the duration of her PhD and postdoctoral studies.
Dr. Marc Boyle
116  Dr. Boyle is an orthopedic surgeon who practiced as such for 30 years. He is now retired from active practice and his work is restricted to conducting independent medical examinations at the request of ICBC.
117  Dr. Boyle saw Ms. Kirkham for an independent medical examination on December 17, 2013. He interviewed Ms. Kirkham and conducted a physical examination. On palpation, he noted tenderness over the left trapezius and rhomboid and normal muscle tone. He also noted tenderness in the hip area and the gluteus maximus muscle. Among other things, he reviewed clinical records of Dr. Gerrard, Ms. Lamy, and Dr. Lloyd-Smith, records from the Austrian hospital where Ms. Kirkham was treated after the bike crash, the medical/legal reports of Dr. Gerrard, Dr. Lloyd-Smith, Dr. Finlayson, and Ms. Lamy's original report.
118  It is Dr. Boyle's opinion that as a result of the accident, Ms. Kirkham suffered a myofascial strain to her cervical spine and she may have sustained a soft tissue strain to her lumbar spine. In his opinion, Ms. Kirkham exacerbated these injuries when she fell off her bike in Austria. In his view, had it not been for that bike crash, Ms. Kirkham's car accident related symptoms would have resolved within six to nine months following the car accident, and, had they persisted beyond that, would not have been disabling.
119  Dr. Boyle disagreed with Dr. Finlayson's opinion that Ms. Kirkham suffers from cervical facet arthropathy. His report noted that there was no radiological evidence that Ms. Kirkham suffered from such a condition. In cross-examination, he equated cervical facet arthropathy with arthritis of the facet joints and he said that the condition occurs when the discs between the vertebrae dry out, which narrows the joint space and leads to the formation of bone spurs. He said there was no radiological evidence to support a finding that Ms. Kirkham has any joint space narrowing or bone spur formation. As already discussed, Dr. Finlayson explained that cervical facet arthropathy is distinct from arthritis and involves inflammation not visible on an x-ray.
120  While Dr. Boyle did not appear to disagree with Dr. Finlayson's diagnoses of myofascial pain syndrome, left hip girdle pain, and chronic pain syndrome, he disagreed that the car accident was the primary contributor to these conditions. He said that Ms. Kirkham's symptoms became inhibiting following the bike crash and any continuing symptoms are, in his view, attributable to the bike crash and not the car accident.
121  In terms of future care, it was Dr. Boyle's opinion that Ms. Kirkham should involve herself in a self-physiotherapy program. In other words, she should carry out exercises on her own. In his opinion, she does not require formal physiotherapy, chiropractic care, massage therapy, acupuncture, a sports psychologist, occupational therapist or any other therapy. In cross-examination, he expressed the view that chiropractic treatments, trigger point injections, acupuncture, and massage therapy are not "curative" and are therefore of no long-term benefit. However, he acknowledged that such treatments would make Ms. Kirkham feel better in the short term.
122  Dr. Boyle's opinions that Ms. Kirkham exacerbated her car accident related injuries in the bike crash and that her continuing symptoms are attributable to the bike crash and not the car accident, were based on the following:
in his opinion, when a person suffers the kinds of injuries Ms. Kirkham suffered in the bike crash (concussion and abrasions on the face, neck, and shoulder) he or she will also suffer flexion or extension of the cervical spine;
the Austrian hospital took x-rays of Ms. Kirkham's neck; and
Ms. Kirkham had been on an upward curve of improvement prior to the bike crash, though not completely asymptomatic, and the resolution of her car accident symptoms was "near complete"; thus, the only explanation for the change in her condition after the crash is that she must have reinjured her neck.
123  In my view, these opinions ought to be given little weight because they either do not follow from the premises upon which they are based or the premises themselves are flawed.
124  Dr. Boyle assumed that because Ms. Kirkham suffered a concussion and abrasions in the fall, she must have injured her neck. However, he ignored Ms. Kirkham's actual symptoms following the bike crash. He reviewed the clinical records and reports of Ms. Kirkham's treating practitioners but neglected to consider the lack of any significant change to Ms. Kirkham's condition, as noted by them. He acknowledged in cross-examination that the Austrian hospital records state there was no indication of pain in the area of the cervical spine following the crash and that the cervical spine moved freely. He did not attempt to explain how, in the face of the findings of Ms. Kirkham's treating practitioners, the Austrian records, and Ms. Kirkham's subjective report that her neck symptoms were not worsened after the crash, he could nevertheless conclude that Ms. Kirkham injured her neck in the crash.
125  It does not follow that because the Austrian hospital took x-rays of Ms. Kirkham's neck, it is likely she suffered a neck injury. It goes without saying that x-rays are a diagnostic tool used to determine whether someone has suffered an injury. The mere fact x-rays were taken does not indicate an injury did indeed occur. It is perplexing that Dr. Boyle relied on the fact x-rays were taken at the Austrian hospital, but not on the hospital records indicating there was no neck pain and the cervical spine moved freely.
126  Dr. Boyle's comments that the resolution of Ms. Kirkham's symptoms was "near complete" prior to the bike crash and that she experienced a significant change in her condition afterward are inconsistent with the clinical records and reports of the treating practitioners. Dr. Boyle appears to have relied on statistics showing that the majority of patients who develop symptoms following a whiplash will make a full recovery, rather than on Ms. Kirkham's actual situation. While Ms. Kirkham's condition certainly improved between January and May 2011, it cannot be said that her symptoms were nearly resolved before the crash. Further, it cannot be said that there was a significant change to her neck and upper back symptoms following the bike crash. In cross-examination, Dr. Boyle agreed that Ms. Kirkham's treating practitioners would be in a better position to state whether there were changes to her condition as a result of the crash. As already noted, he had access to their records and reports and yet did not refer to them in explaining the basis for his opinions.
127  Dr. Boyle claimed that his assumption about Ms. Kirkham's condition before the bike crash was based on the history as relayed to him by her. Defence counsel submits that Dr. Boyle was entitled to rely on that history and cannot be blamed if that history is inconsistent with the clinical records. However, Dr. Boyle acknowledged that he did not ask Ms. Kirkham very much about the progression of her symptoms. He appeared to assume that Ms. Kirkham's recovery was near complete from what he was told about her attempts to return to training and competition between January and May 2011, instead of considering the evidence of her actual progression of symptoms over time.
128  Dr. Boyle's failure to consider Ms. Kirkham's symptoms before and after the bike crash, as noted by her treating practitioners, particularly given his admission that those practitioners would be in a better position to state whether there were changes in her condition following the bike crash, is, in my view, so fundamental that it calls into question the reliability of Dr. Boyle's evidence generally. For these reasons, where there are conflicts in the expert evidence, I prefer the evidence of Dr. Finlayson, Dr. Lloyd-Smith, and Dr. Gerrard over the evidence of Dr. Boyle.
MS. KIRKHAM'S CREDIBILITY
129  The defendant submits that Ms. Kirkham has overstated her symptoms, particularly in the time period leading up to the bike crash, and that her evidence that she had no change to her neck pain pattern or intensity following the bike crash and that her concussion did not contribute to her decision to take the leave of absence should not be believed.
130  The factors to be considered when assessing credibility were summarized in Bradshaw v. Stenner, , at para.186, aff'd . They include the firmness of the witness's memory, the ability of the witness to resist the influence of interest in modifying her recollection, whether the witness's evidence harmonizes with independent evidence that has been accepted, whether the witness changes her evidence during direct examination and cross-examination (or between examination for discovery and trial) or is otherwise inconsistent in her recollections, whether the witness's evidence seems generally unreasonable, impossible, or unlikely, and the witness's demeanor. Fundamentally, the question is whether the witness's evidence is consistent with the probabilities affecting the case as a whole.
131  As Ms. Kirkham's case involves subjective complaints of pain, it is particularly important to exercise caution and examine her evidence carefully: Price v. Kostryba  (S.C.). If her account is not convincing, then the hypothesis upon which her medical evidence rests will be undermined: Samuel v. Chrysler Credit Canada Ltd., , at paras. 15, 43-44. Having said that, this is not a case that is entirely dependent on subjective complaints. Dr. Lloyd-Smith, Dr. Gerrard, and Dr. Finlayson all found objective symptoms including muscle spasm and taut bands.
132  The defendant submits that Ms. Kirkham's evidence of the progression of her symptoms, particularly just prior to the Austrian race, is inconsistent with her evidence about her ability to train in the weeks prior to that race and her decision to return to competition at that time. The defendant submits this is similar to the claim in Sandhar v. Rolston, , where the plaintiff continued to suffer from shoulder pain and yet decided to undertake three days of snow shoveling. In Sandhar, Mr. Justice Affleck found it impossible to reconcile a decision to shovel snow over three days for several hours each day with the presence of significant shoulder pain.
133  In my view, the decisions Ms. Kirkham made with respect to the resumption of her training and attempts at competition bear no similarity to the plaintiff's decision in Sandhar to shovel snow. The evidence clearly established that Ms. Kirkham is extremely focused, goal-oriented, determined, and competitive. Triathlon was her passion. She changed the way she trained in order to minimize the pain (such as cycling indoors initially, changing her bike setup, modifying her swimming by not doing flip turns, etc.). She was optimistic that she would get better. She had always recovered from injuries before and assumed she would recover again. She was determined to minimize her deconditioning so that when the pain resolved she would be ready to go. She was prepared to train through pain, and she did so. She cannot be faulted for having taken this approach. The defence submission in this regard places her in an obvious "catch 22". In trying valiantly to return to her pre-accident lifestyle, she is said to have been exaggerating the effects of her injuries; however, if she failed to try to return to her pre-accident lifestyle, she likely would have been criticized for the same.
134  The defendant submits that Ms. Kirkham was impeached on some key points in her evidence. At most, the defendant has identified some minor differences in what Ms. Kirkham said about her condition at various times and in very different circumstances. Some of the alleged inconsistencies arise from statements made by Ms. Kirkham on her website and Twitter feed. In Diack v. Bardsley  (S.C.), at para. 30, aff'd  (C.A.), McEachern C.J.S.C. said the "usefulness [of minor variations between a witness's evidence at trial and on discovery] is limited because witnesses seldom speak with much precision at discovery ...". The same can be said, but with more force, about the precision and fullness with which people speak on social media, particularly on Twitter where messages may not exceed 140 characters in length. Ms. Kirkham explained that she often tweeted positive messages as this was one way of trying to keep up good relations with her sponsors. Also, the fact that she did so is consistent with Ms. Kirkham's natural tendencies. She is a positive individual who was determined to recover from her injuries, and in these circumstances it is not at all surprising that she would have taken to social media to report, with enthusiasm, a particularly good day.
135  The defendant says that Ms. Kirkham claimed, in her evidence in chief, to have been in constant pain from January to March 2011, getting only some relief from her treatments, but that her own symptom diary establishes that she had some pain-free days. First, many of Ms. Kirkham's witnesses, particularly Mr. Stephens, Dr. Gerrard, and Mr. Carlsson, corroborated her evidence of significant disability during the first three or so months following the car accident. Further, when her symptom diary is reviewed as a whole, it supports the plaintiff's evidence. While she did have some good days, they were often followed by particularly bad days. In my view, the symptom diary corroborates Ms. Kirkham's evidence of her determination to persevere in the face of significant pain.
136  The defendant also criticizes Ms. Kirkham for having written on her website that she did not participate in triathlons in June and July 2011 due to both her concussion and her neck injury, and yet on Twitter and in her evidence at trial she testified that she could not train or race following the bike crash due to her concussion. However, when Ms. Kirkham's evidence is considered as a whole, there is no inconsistency. At trial, she acknowledged that she could not train following the bike crash because of her concussion symptoms, but she also said that her neck symptoms continued to hinder her ability to train and race.
137  The defendant submits that Ms. Kirkham was impeached when she testified at trial that a sprint triathlon she did in the summer of 2012 was difficult and not enjoyable, yet she tweeted on June 11, 2012, that she "Love[d] being on the bike again". Ms. Kirkham's evidence at trial was that in July 2012 she competed in this sprint triathlon, which is about one-quarter of the distance of a half-Ironman race. She said she had some good training sessions in June and on that basis decided to try this race in July. She said the race was not enjoyable. Her pace times for all three segments were similar to what she had achieved in 2010 competing in half-Ironman races. As she put it, she was doing "one-quarter of the distance but at the same speed, which was pretty humbling". She also said she had neck pain during the race. The tweet which is said to be inconsistent with this evidence is dated June 11, 2012, some weeks before the sprint triathlon, and reads:
After all the drama, ended up being a good workout! 3 hrs with 4X15 min tempo with ascending avg. W. Love being on the bike again!
138  The tweet, on its face, does not refer to a race but rather a bike workout. It appears to indicate she had a good day of training on June 11, 2012. It is entirely consistent with her evidence at trial that she had some good training sessions in June. It is not at all inconsistent with her evidence of pain during a race several weeks later, her performance at which provided her with disappointing evidence of her lack of progress.
139  Ms. Kirkham's evidence about her pre-accident lifestyle, the impact of the car accident on that lifestyle, and her efforts to return to her pre-accident condition was corroborated by several other witnesses, including her treating practitioners, Mr. Stephens, Mr. Carlsson, Dr. Campbell, Ms. Schneeberg, Mr. Johnson, and Ms. Wilkie. The defence submitted that the evidence of Mr. Stephens, Mr. Carlsson, Dr. Campbell, Ms. Schneeberg, Mr. Johnson, and Ms. Wilkie ought to be given little weight because they are all affected by natural human bias owing to their familiarity with and varying degrees of affection for Ms. Kirkham. However, this too places Ms. Kirkham in a "catch 22" position. The people in a position to comment on the impact of the accident on Ms. Kirkham's life are the people she shares her life with. Had she not called any such people as witnesses, the court would likely have been asked to draw an adverse inference from her failure to do so. I was impressed by all of the witnesses called by Ms. Kirkham. They were all careful and precise in giving their evidence. None was shown to be inaccurate. I accept their evidence.
140  While Ms. Kirkham may not have remembered precisely how she was feeling each day over the last three and one-half years, this is to be expected particularly where, as here, she has not enjoyed steady improvement. Rather, as described by Mr. Carlsson, her progress is better characterized as one step forward, two steps back, two steps forward, one step back, or as described by Mr. Stephens as progressing in waves, or as described by Ms. Kirkham as a series of peaks and valleys. Ms. Kirkham's evidence was largely consistent with the statements she made on her Twitter account, blog, and website and the statements attributed to her in the clinical records of her treating practitioners. Her efforts to resume training and try to compete notwithstanding continuing pain are consistent with her incredibly driven personality. She was forthright and frankly described the efforts she made to return to her pre-accident lifestyle. Her evidence is consistent with the probabilities affecting the case as a whole. In short, I found Ms. Kirkham to be a very credible witness and I accept her evidence.
ANALYSIS
Causation
141  Ms. Kirkham must establish on a balance of probabilities that the defendant's negligence was both a factual and legal cause of her injuries. In a case such as this, where there are multiple potential causes of injury, the court must also consider whether her injuries are divisible or indivisible.
142  The general test for causation in fact, established in Athey v. Leonati, , at paras. 13-17, is the "but for" test: "but for" the defendant's negligence, would the plaintiff's injuries have occurred? Cause in fact need not be determined by scientific precision and is best answered with ordinary common sense: Athey, at para. 16.
143  The plaintiff need not establish that the defendant's negligence was the sole cause of the injury. If other potential causes exist, such as the bike crash in this case, the plaintiff will still establish cause in fact if she can prove a substantial connection between the injury and the defendant's conduct, beyond the de minimus range: Farrant v. Laktin, , at para. 11.
144  The characterization of damage as divisible or indivisible is necessary to ensure that the defendant is not held liable for injuries not caused by his or her negligence: Athey, at paras. 24-25. If an injury is indivisible, subject to contributory negligence and subject to the plaintiff also establishing legal causation, the defendant is liable to the plaintiff for all damages attributable to that injury regardless of the contribution of other causes: Athey, at paras. 17-20. Indivisible injuries are those that cannot be separated or have liability attributed to the constituent causes whereas divisible injuries are those capable of being separated out and having their damages assessed independently: Bradley v. Groves, , at para. 20. Whether damage is divisible or indivisible is a question of fact: B.P.B. v. M.M.B., , at para. 74.
145  In order to establish legal causation, the plaintiff must show that the type or kind of injury she suffered was reasonably foreseeable or, in other words, not too remote from the factual cause: T.W.N.A. v. Canada (Ministry of Indian Affairs), , at para. 17; Hussack v. Chilliwack School District No. 33, , at para 54.
146  The chain of causation will be "broken" where an intervening event, rather than the defendant's conduct, is considered the proximate or legal cause of the subsequent injury. This principle, known as novus actus interveniens, recognizes that defendants should not be held liable for objectively unforeseen consequences of their actions: Hussack, at para. 87; Yoshikawa v. Yu  (C.A.), at para. 21.
147  The question of whether an intervening event breaks the chain of causation is a question of fact: Hussack, at para. 88.
148  Where the intervening event consists of conduct of the plaintiff, the question of whether it breaks the chain of causation depends upon whether the plaintiff acted unreasonably. As stated by Madam Justice Bennett in Hussack, at para. 82:
In essence, the decisions say that if an injured party acts unreasonably and causes him or herself further injury, the tortfeasor is not responsible for injuries suffered as a result of the second injury.
Assessment of damages
149  Once causation in fact and law has been established, the analysis shifts to the rules of damages which determine the quantum of the defendant's liability. The fundamental principle in assessing tort damages is that the quantum should be that which is required to place the plaintiff in his or her original position, i.e. the position he or she would have been in absent the defendant's negligence: Athey, at para. 32. The defendant need not put the plaintiff in a better position than his or her original position and should not compensate the plaintiff for any damages he or she would have suffered anyway: Blackwater v. Plint, , at para. 78. The analysis requires a determination of the plaintiff's position after the negligence and an assessment of what the plaintiff's original position would have been, and it is the difference between these positions that represents the quantum of the defendant's liability: Athey, at para. 32.
150  In determining the plaintiff's original position, it may be necessary to consider any debilitating effects of a manifest pre-existing condition or to take into account a measurable risk that a pre-existing condition would have detrimentally affected the plaintiff in the future regardless of the defendant's negligence. This is the crumbling skull rule, and results in the damages award being reduced to reflect circumstances inherent in the plaintiff's pre-accident condition: Athey, at para. 35.
151  Unrelated intervening events may be taken into account in the same way as pre-existing conditions. If an intervening event would have affected the plaintiff's original position adversely irrespective of the defendant's negligence, it may be appropriate to reduce the quantum of the defendant's liability accordingly: Athey, at paras. 31-32; T.W.N.A., at para. 36.
Findings of fact regarding the plaintiff's injuries
152  Applying the principles summarized above, I must determine:
what injuries were suffered by Ms. Kirkham as a result of the car accident and whether any of them were also caused or exacerbated by the bike crash;
if any of the injuries were caused by both the car accident and the bike crash, whether the bike crash amounts to a novus actus interveniens, breaking the chain of causation; and,
whether the injuries suffered by Ms. Kirkham in the bike crash have affected her in any event such that her damage awards should be reduced.
What injuries were suffered by Ms. Kirkham as a result of the car accident? Were any also caused or exacerbated by the bike crash?
153  It is not disputed that Ms. Kirkham suffered soft tissue injuries to her neck, shoulders, and upper back as a result of the car accident.
154  Ms. Kirkham submits that she has also developed myofascial pain syndrome, cervical facet arthropathy, chronic pain syndrome, and left hip girdle pain. She submits that these conditions continue to affect her more than three years after the accident, have forced her to give up her career as a professional triathlete, and have delayed her PhD studies by a year.
155  The defendant submits that while the soft tissue injuries initially affected Ms. Kirkham's studies and her training and competition as a triathlete, her symptoms and function improved over the four and one-half months between the car accident and the bike crash. The defendant also submits that had it not been for the bike crash, her symptoms would have resolved and her function would have returned within six to nine months following the car accident. The defendant does not appear to take serious issue with the diagnoses of myofascial pain syndrome, chronic pain syndrome, and left hip girdle pain, but, as already noted, submits that Ms. Kirkham's continuing symptoms are attributable to the bike crash. The defendant disputes the diagnosis of cervical facet arthropathy.
156  The medical evidence clearly supports a finding that Ms. Kirkham suffers from myofascial pain syndrome. Drs. Lloyd-Smith, Gerrard, and Boyle all agreed that she suffered soft tissue or myofascial strain to her neck and upper back areas. Dr. Finlayson and Dr. Lloyd-Smith are both of the view that she now suffers from myofascial pain syndrome as a result. Dr. Finlayson is also of the view that she suffers from chronic pain syndrome as a result. There is no contrary evidence. I accept the evidence of Dr. Lloyd-Smith and Dr. Finlayson, and find that Ms. Kirkham developed and continues to suffer from myofascial pain syndrome and chronic pain syndrome.
157  Dr. Finlayson is also of the view that Ms. Kirkham suffers from cervical facet arthropathy. Dr. Boyle disagreed with this diagnosis. As already discussed, Dr. Boyle and Dr. Finlayson appeared to be using the same term, cervical facet arthropathy, to refer to different conditions. Little turns on the name given to Ms. Kirkham's condition as the effect on her is the same. I find that she developed and continues to suffer from what Dr. Finlayson described as cervical facet arthropathy.
158  Dr. Finlayson is also of the view that Ms. Kirkham suffers from left hip girdle pain. While Dr. Boyle said the "etiology of her [hip] complaints is unclear", he did not express the view that Ms. Kirkham does not have hip pain. He disagreed with Dr. Finlayson's opinion that the hip pain was a consequence of deconditioning due to Ms. Kirkham's reduced activity level following the car accident. I will address the cause of the deconditioning later in these reasons. For now, on the basis of Ms. Kirkham's and Dr. Finlayson's evidence, I find that Ms. Kirkham is suffering from left hip girdle pain, and, on the basis of Dr. Finlayson's evidence, that it is caused by deconditioning.
159  The next question is whether Ms. Kirkham's myofascial pain syndrome, chronic pain syndrome, cervical facet arthropathy, and left hip girdle pain were caused by the car accident, the bike crash, or both.
160  As already stated, the defendant submits that but for the bike crash, Ms. Kirkham's symptoms would have resolved within six to nine months following the car accident and any continuing symptoms and disability she suffers are attributable solely to the bike crash. The defence theory is based on Dr. Boyle's opinion that Ms. Kirkham was on a path of recovery by mid May 2011, her recovery was "near complete" by then, and her condition significantly worsened after the bike crash.
161  In my view, it is clear from the evidence that Ms. Kirkham's recovery was not "near complete" by May 2011, and she was not on a continuing path of recovery at the time of the bike crash.
162  First, as already noted, Dr. Finlayson, Dr. Gerrard and Dr. Lloyd-Smith have contrary opinions and, for the reasons discussed, I prefer their evidence over that of Dr. Boyle.
163  Second, Ms. Kirkham's evidence, as well as the evidence of Dr. Gerrard and Mr. Carlsson, establishes that while Ms. Kirkham's condition did improve in the first three months following the accident, it then plateaued, with continuing peaks and valleys. The results of the Neck Disability and Oswestry indices administered by Dr. Gerrard show a marked improvement, particularly in her neck disability, between January and March 2011, but followed by a plateau with more moderate peaks and valleys. When Ms. Kirkham saw Ms. Lamy for the first time in late April 2011 she considered herself 50% improved. She went from no training immediately following the accident to as much as 18 hours per week by early May 2011. However, her training was still nowhere near where she had been before the accident in terms of intensity, consistency, and technique.
164  Third, Ms. Kirkham's evidence, as well as the evidence of Ms. Lamy, Dr. Lloyd-Smith, and Dr. Gerrard, establishes that Ms. Kirkham was continuing to suffer from significant symptoms at the time of the bike crash. On April 26, 2011, Ms. Lamy noted upper facet joint dysfunction of the upper cervical region as well as the mid/lower cervical area with right shoulder and arm discomfort and some neural tension. On May 5, 2011, Dr. Lloyd-Smith diagnosed myofascial pain syndrome and on May 6, 2011, he administered trigger point analgesic injections which provided some relief. On May 6, 2011, Dr. Gerrard was continuing to note palpatory tenderness in her cervical and thoracic spine. Ms. Kirkham testified that she was treated by a physiotherapist in Spain before the Spanish race and her neck was taped before both the Spanish and the Austrian races. She also testified that her neck pain was very bad during the last hour of the cycling portion of the Spanish race and that her neck was hurting right from the beginning of the cycling portion of the Austrian race. I accept all this evidence.
165  The next question is whether the bike crash exacerbated the effects of the injuries suffered in the car accident.
166  The defendant submits that from the speed Ms. Kirkham was traveling and the fact that she did not have more serious injuries to her body, it is reasonable to infer that her helmet (and by extension, her head) absorbed much of the impact of the fall. The defendant submits that because Ms. Kirkham had road rash, her body must have contorted as she felt. From this, the defendant advances the theory that the blow to Ms. Kirkham's head and the contortion of her body would have involved a rapid movement of her head and neck either backwards and forwards and/or from side to side and this would have caused soft tissue type strain to her neck, exacerbating her car accident related injuries. The defendant acknowledges that Ms. Kirkham's evidence at trial was that she had no change to her neck pain pattern or intensity as a result of the crash but suggested I should reject this evidence as defying logic.
167  I do not accept the defence theory. First, it rests upon the assumption that the fall would have resulted in neck movement consistent with the mechanism of injury for whiplash, but that is entirely speculative because no one knows how Ms. Kirkham fell. Although neck pain often co-exists with concussion, it was clear from Dr. Gerrard's evidence and Dr. Finlayson's evidence that this is not invariably so. Second, I accept Ms. Kirkham's evidence that she had no change to her neck pain pattern or intensity following the bike crash. It is consistent with what she said at the time (as reflected in the Austrian hospital records and the clinical records of her treating practitioners). It is also consistent with her objective symptoms following the crash as noted by Dr. Lloyd-Smith and Dr. Gerrard.
168  The defendant submits that Ms. Kirkham's evidence on this point is inconsistent with Jill Olson's evidence. Ms. Olson performed an ergonomic assessment of Ms. Kirkham's workstation at UBC in August 2011. The defendant's written submission states that Ms. Olson testified that, during that meeting, Ms. Kirkham told her that she experienced an exacerbation of her car accident related injuries as part of her concussion. In my view, this overstates Ms. Olson's evidence. When asked what, if anything, Ms. Kirkham told her about the injuries she had suffered in the bike crash, Ms. Olson said she did not have anything in her notes in quotation marks and so she does not know if Ms. Kirkham said anything specific. Ms. Olson said she "would have taken some notes suggesting that she sustained a concussion and her symptoms had been exacerbated", but she acknowledged that she spent very little time discussing the bike crash with Ms. Kirkham, as her focus was on Ms. Kirkham's current needs. Ms. Kirkham testified that her concussion symptoms exacerbated the problems she was having with her computer work for a time. She also testified that she had to significantly decrease her training again as a result of her concussion symptoms. Any or all of that could have caused Ms. Olson to note that "her symptoms have been exacerbated". Given the very short time they discussed the matter, the fact that Ms. Olson made a point of saying that she does not know if Ms. Kirkham said anything specific, and the vagueness of her note about the symptoms having been exacerbated, I do not consider Ms. Olson's evidence to conflict with Ms. Kirkham's.
169  Finally, given the expert evidence that I have accepted, a finding that Ms. Kirkham did not significantly aggravate her neck injury in the bike crash cannot be said to defy logic. Dr. Lloyd-Smith, Dr. Gerrard, and Dr. Finlayson all expressed the view that the bike crash did not significantly contribute to Ms. Kirkham's ongoing neck, upper back, and shoulder pain. Dr. Boyle disagreed with that view, but for the reasons already expressed, I prefer the evidence of Dr. Lloyd-Smith, Dr. Gerrard, and Dr. Finlayson over the evidence of Dr. Boyle.
170  I do not accept the submission that, but for the bike crash in Austria, Ms. Kirkham would have made a full recovery from the injuries she suffered in the car accident within six to nine months. It is clear from the above summary that this theory is not in accordance with the preponderance of the evidence, which establishes that Ms. Kirkham continued to suffer the debilitating impacts of the car accident before, at the time of, and after the Austrian bike crash.
171  For the above reasons, I find that the bike crash did not exacerbate Ms. Kirkham's neck and upper back injuries and did not contribute to her myofascial pain syndrome, chronic pain syndrome, or cervical facet arthropathy. I find that Ms. Kirkham's myofascial pain syndrome, chronic pain syndrome and cervical facet arthropathy were caused by the car accident.
172  I have found that Ms. Kirkham's left hip girdle pain, which only became a material issue for her in the fall of 2012, was caused by deconditioning. The evidence clearly established that Ms. Kirkham suffered a concussion in the bike crash and that she significantly reduced her training for at least three months following the bike crash. Given the reduction in her training over the summer of 2011 due to the concussion, the only reasonable inference is that the concussion contributed to the deconditioning. For these reasons I find that the left hip girdle pain is an indivisible injury caused by both the car accident and the bike crash.
Did the bike crash break the chain of causation?
173  Counsel for the defendant submits that Ms. Kirkham claims the bike crash in Austria would not have occurred but for the injuries she suffered in the car accident. Counsel for the defendant then responds that the bike crash was a non-tortious intervening event sufficient to break the causal chain between the car accident and Ms. Kirkham's subsequent claimed damage.
174  In my view, this submission mischaracterizes Ms. Kirkham's position with respect to the bike crash. She is not asserting that the defendant is liable for the injuries she suffered in the bike crash, such as the concussion and abrasions. Further, and in any event, it cannot be said that Ms. Kirkham acted unreasonably in participating in the Austrian race. Her decision to do so was supported by her treating practitioners and her coach. None of the practitioners who testified indicated they had any concerns regarding her safety in attempting the race. For these reasons, the defence of novus actus interveniens does not apply.
Did the injuries suffered by Ms. Kirkham in the bike crash affect her in any event such that her damage awards should be reduced?
175  For the reasons already set out, I have found that the bike crash did not exacerbate Ms. Kirkham's injuries. However, the concussion she suffered in the bike crash did contribute to the deconditioning that in turn led to the left hip girdle pain.
176  The defendant submitted that Ms. Kirkham's concussion also contributed to her decision to take a leave of absence from her PhD studies, and this should be reflected in any award for loss of income earning capacity.
177  Ms. Kirkham testified that in the summer of 2011 she was not concerned about the concussion because the symptoms were resolving as expected. Rather, she was distressed by the fact that she was continuing to experience neck pain, and this interfered with her ability to work on the computer. The decision to take the leave of absence was not made until October 2011 and, by that time, according to Ms. Kirkham, her concussion symptoms had resolved. The stress that Ms. Kirkham was feeling in September and October 2011, related in part to the time she was spending attending the many rehabilitation sessions for her soft tissue injuries.
178  Dr. Lloyd-Smith testified that the concussion was not an issue in October 2011 when Ms. Kirkham decided to take the leave. He recommended the leave because he thought Ms. Kirkham needed to minimize her stress and reduce her computer use which was interfering with the rehabilitation of her neck injury.
179  In my view, there is no real and substantial possibility that Ms. Kirkham would have taken a leave of absence in any event as a result of the concussion. Based on the totality of the evidence, I find on the balance of probabilities that the concussion did not contribute to Ms. Kirkham's leave of absence from her PhD studies.
180  The defendant submitted that Ms. Kirkham's concussion also contributed to her decision to cancel triathlons in the summer and fall of 2011, and this should be reflected in any award for loss of income earning capacity. Ms. Kirkham acknowledged that as a result of the concussion symptoms over the summer of 2011, not only was she unable to compete in triathlons, she was not even able to train. She also acknowledged that this hiatus from her training, together with the pain she felt during the cycling portion of the Austrian race, forced her to accept that she was not going to qualify for the 2011 World Championship and so she decided there was no point in continuing to push through the pain. In other words, she concluded that she had lost the 2011 season and so eased back into training more gradually than she otherwise would have done. The only reasonable inference from this evidence is that the concussion caused Ms. Kirkham to cancel the races over the summer of 2011 and contributed to her decision to cancel the race she had planned for the fall of 2011.
181  I will address the contribution of the concussion to Ms. Kirkham's left hip girdle pain and to her decision to stop competing over the balance of 2011 when I address the relevant heads of damage.
Summary
182  In summary, and having taken into account all the evidence, I make the following findings:
Ms. Kirkham suffered soft tissue injuries to her neck, shoulders and upper back as a result of the car accident.
Those injuries have resulted in myofascial pain syndrome, cervical facet arthropathy, and chronic pain syndrome, all of which continue to affect Ms. Kirkham.
Ms. Kirkham suffered a concussion and abrasions in the bike crash which are divisible injuries for which the defendant is not liable.
Ms. Kirkham did not exacerbate or aggravate her soft tissue injuries in the bike crash and the bike crash did not contribute to Ms. Kirkham's myofascial pain syndrome, cervical facet arthropathy, or chronic pain syndrome.
Ms. Kirkham's soft tissue injuries and the concussion she suffered in the bike crash both resulted in deconditioning that, in turn, caused Ms. Kirkham's left hip girdle pain, which is an indivisible injury.
Ms. Kirkham took a leave of absence that delayed the completion of her PhD studies by a year. The leave was required for Ms. Kirkham to focus on rehabilitation of the injuries caused by the car accident. The concussion did not contribute to Ms. Kirkham's leave of absence from her PhD studies.
As a result of the concussion, Ms. Kirkham did not compete in any triathlons during the summer of 2011. The concussion and the soft tissue injuries both contributed to her decision not to compete in any triathlons over the rest of 2011.
Damages
Non-pecuniary damages
183  Non-pecuniary damages are intended to compensate for pain, suffering, loss of enjoyment of life, and loss of amenities. In Stapley v. Hejslet, , at para. 46, leave to appeal ref'd , the Court of Appeal set out a non-exhaustive list of factors to be considered by the court in assessing non-pecuniary damages including the age of the plaintiff, the nature of the injury, the severity and duration of pain, the extent of disability and impairment of physical and mental abilities, emotional suffering, impairment of family and other relationships, and loss of lifestyle.
184  The injuries Ms. Kirkham suffered in the car accident have had a very significant impact on all aspects of her life. Based on Ms. Kirkham's evidence and the evidence of her treating practitioners, I find that the pain in her neck and upper back areas was initially very intense, affecting her virtually every day, that it then improved by about 50% by late April 2011, and then plateaued with more modest peaks and valleys until the fall of 2012, when she gave up her high level training. While not pursuing her studies, Ms. Kirkham was able, particularly in 2012, to return to an intense level of training, but could not sustain it once she returned to school in the fall of 2012. The pain continues to be exacerbated by activities that require prolonged static postures, such as computer work and bike racing.
185  Since giving up her high level training in the fall of 2012, Ms. Kirkham's pain has become manageable as long as she restricts her computer work to a normal workweek. She suffers flare-ups of pain when she has to do more. She also continues to have pain if working away from her office workstation, engaging in lifting, and when running.
186  In addition to the pain, Ms. Kirkham was limited in her ability to perform household chores and grocery shopping and had to call upon Mr. Stephens for many of those tasks. She has been able to return to performing some of these daily activities, although any kind of lifting still causes her pain.
187  Ms. Kirkham's injuries have affected her personal relationships with her husband and her friends, as she can no longer engage in many of the physical activities they choose to engage in. Her social life is entirely different than it was before the accident.
188  The injuries also interfered with Ms. Kirkham's studies. She had to put her education on hold for a year. The work has been made more challenging due to the pain caused by the computer work. Her injuries led to her uncharacteristically poor performance during the second term of her PhD, which devastated her. Although she has managed to put her academic career back on track, she has done so at the cost of her high level athletics.
189  The biggest impact on Ms. Kirkham's life has been the loss of her ability to compete as an elite athlete. While many people might see an upside in the switch from intensely demanding, competitive physical activities like triathlon, running races, and time trials, to recreational and restorative activities like bike riding, yoga, and Pilates, that is not how Ms. Kirkham sees it. As she put it, neither she nor Mr. Stephens was interested in engaging in activities for fun. They both wanted to work at being the best at something. That dream has been taken from her. She has been devastated by and continues to struggle emotionally with the loss of her identity as an elite athlete.
190  Dr. Finlayson and Mr. Campbell both expressed the view that while there is potential for Ms. Kirkham to continue to improve and to engage in recreational sport with continued physiotherapy and other care, she will never return to competitive triathlon. Dr. Gerrard's prognosis is similar. In his view, Ms. Kirkham will sustain her current level of disability long-term. Dr. Lloyd-Smith is slightly more optimistic. In his view, it is possible, but unlikely given the delay, that Ms. Kirkham could return to elite level athletics once she completes her PhD. I accept all this evidence and find that Ms. Kirkham will continue to improve and will not be limited in her ability to participate in recreational sport, but she is very unlikely to return to elite training and competition.
191  Ms. Kirkham submits that an award of non-pecuniary damages of <damage type = "other">$140,000</damage> is appropriate. She cites the following cases in support:
Clark v. Kouba, , aff'd  (<damage type = "other">$85,000</damage>);
Isert v. Santos  (B.C.S.C.) (<damage type = "other">$60,000</damage>), rev'd  (<damage type = "other">$40,000</damage>);
Bonham v. Smith  (S.C.) (<damage type = "other">$130,000</damage>); and
Smith v. Fremlin,  (<damage type = "other">$90,000</damage>).
192  On the basis of Dr. Boyle's opinion that, but for the bike crash, Ms. Kirkham would have recovered within six to nine months following the car accident, the defendant submits that <damage type = "other">$20,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$30,000</damage> is an appropriate award for non-pecuniary damages. I have not accepted that opinion. In the alternative, the defendant submits that even if the bike crash is not found to have caused or contributed to the plaintiff's continuing symptoms, an appropriate award for non-pecuniary damages is in the range of <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$55,000</damage>. The defendant cites the following cases in support of that alternative submission:
Morrison v. Gauthier,  (<damage type = "other">$55,000</damage>);
Connolly v. Cowie,  (<damage type = "other">$50,000</damage>); and
Haughain v. Kaufman,  (<damage type = "other">$40,000</damage>).
193  Awards of non-pecuniary damages in other cases provide a useful guide but the specific circumstances of each individual plaintiff must be considered as any award of damages is to be based on the adverse impact of the particular injuries on the particular plaintiff. In my view, some of the authorities submitted by Ms. Kirkham, particularly Bonham, are a better guide when assessing Ms. Kirkham's non-pecuniary damages than those submitted by the defence. Although the plaintiffs in the cases relied upon by the defendant were all athletes, it does not appear that any were aspiring or likely to become professional athletes.
194  In Bonham, the plaintiff had been one of Australia's leading professional triathletes prior to the accident that gave rise to the case. Following the accident, she continued to experience success in triathlons, placing first at least four times in Australian national and international competitions. However, the injuries she suffered in the accident prevented her from being able to achieve the highest level of success in her sport. I acknowledge that Ms. Bonham was not an aspiring professional athlete at the time of her accident - she had already arrived. However, she continued to succeed in her sport even after her accident. While Ms. Kirkham was still aspiring, she was on the very verge of breaking through. Unlike Ms. Bonham, it appears likely that Ms. Kirkham's triathlon career is over.
195  Having regard to the case law cited and the Stapley factors, I assess Ms. Kirkham's non-pecuniary damages at <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$130,000</damage>, but reduced by <damage type = "reduction">$10,000</damage> to reflect the possibility that the deconditioning associated with the concussion would have caused her hip pain in any event.
Loss of income earning capacity
196  Both past and future income loss is properly considered on the basis of loss of earning capacity: Ibbitson v. Cooper, , at para. 19.
197  The burden of proof for actual past events is a balance of probabilities. However, an assessment of loss of both past and future earning capacity also involves consideration of hypothetical events. The plaintiff is not required to prove these hypothetical events on a balance of probabilities; rather, hypothetical events are given weight according to their relative likelihood. The future or hypothetical possibility will be taken into consideration as long as it is a real and substantial possibility and not mere speculation: Athey, at para. 27; Morlan v. Barrett, , at para. 38.
198  An award for loss of earning capacity, whether past or future, requires the assessment of damages which considers the overall fairness and reasonableness of the award taking into account all positive and negative contingencies, not a calculation according to a mathematical formula: Schenker v. Scott, , at para 53.
Loss of Past Earning Capacity
199  The value of a particular plaintiff's capacity to earn is equivalent to the value of the earnings that she or he would have, not could have, earned but for the injury that was sustained: Rowe v. Bobell Express Ltd., , at para. 30; M.B. v. British Columbia, , at para. 49.
200  Pursuant to s. 98 of the Insurance (Vehicle) Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 231, a plaintiff is entitled to recover only his or her past net income loss: Rizzolo v. Brett, , at para. 72, aff'd .
201  Ms. Kirkham claims that but for the injuries she sustained in the car accident, she would have earned income from three sources:
a grant funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research ("CIHR");
income earned as a teaching assistant; and
potential prize money from triathlons.
202  Ms. Kirkham acknowledged that her CIHR grant was not lost. Rather it was simply paused during her leave of absence, and has now resumed. There is no real and substantial possibility that she will suffer pecuniary loss as a result.
203  Ms. Kirkham was forced to give up her work as a teaching assistant while on her leave of absence and, upon returning to school, she reduced the teaching that she would otherwise have engaged in. Her expert economics evidence established that up to the time of trial she suffered a net income loss of approximately <damage type = "other">$6,200</damage> due to the reduction in her teaching assistant work. I find that she would have earned that income but for the injuries she sustained in the car accident.
204  Ms. Kirkham seeks approximately <damage type = "other">$31,000</damage>, representing lost triathlon prize money for the period from the car accident to the trial.
205  Ms. Kirkham estimated the prize money she would have won in each of 2011, 2012, and 2013. For 2011, she listed each of the races that she had planned to compete in that year and then compared the actual results of those races with her assessment of how she would have performed on an average day assuming moderate improvement in her performance over the prior year. On this basis, she estimated forgone prize money for 2011 of <damage type = "other">$12,200</damage>. She estimated expenses of <damage type = "other">$4,166</damage> for entry fees and travel costs, for a net loss of prize income in 2011 of about <damage type = "other">$8,000</damage>.
206  Ms. Kirkham performed a similar analysis to estimate lost prize money for 2012 and 2013, but considered the races she would likely have competed in given her PhD commitments. She included fewer international races because of those commitments. She estimated net prize money of approximately <damage type = "other">$10,700</damage> in 2012 (<damage type = "other">$13,700</damage> gross prize money less entry fees and travel costs of just under <damage type = "other">$3,000</damage>) and <damage type = "other">$12,700</damage> in 2013 ($14,750 gross prize money less entry fees and travel costs of just over $2,000).
207  Ms. Kirkham earned <damage type = "other">$3,000</damage> in prize money from triathlon in 2010, but she acknowledged that her expenses exceeded <damage type = "other">$3,000</damage> that year. In her examination for discovery, she indicated that travel expenses alone would exceed <damage type = "other">$3,000</damage> a year. She also testified that fees for the Regional Triathlon Centre were <damage type = "other">$3,000</damage> per year, and she did not factor that amount into her analysis. When competing in 2010, she required performance care from Dr. Gerrard approximately three times per month. Based on her special damages claim, Dr. Gerrard charges $45 per session, so performance care would cost approximately <damage type = "other">$135</damage> per month, or <damage type = "other">$1,620</damage> per year.
208  For the reasons already discussed, I have found that Ms. Kirkham did not compete in any triathlons during the summer of 2011 as a result of the concussion, and the concussion and the soft tissue injuries both contributed to her decision not to compete in any triathlons over the balance of 2011. Her estimated gross prize winnings for 2011 included $3,400 for four races in the summer of 2011 and $2,000 for one race in October.
209  There is no doubt Ms. Kirkham won some prize money in 2010. Leaving aside the races in 2011 that she missed due in whole or in part to the concussion, it is clear she has not been able to race due to the car accident injuries. On the basis of those findings, she has established an impairment to her capacity to earn income from triathlon. However, the question remains as to whether she has established a real and substantial possibility that this diminished capacity has resulted in a pecuniary loss.
210  Considering Ms. Kirkham's performance in 2010, when she was relatively new to the sport, Mr. Carlsson's evidence as to her great potential, and Ms. Kirkham's evidence of her intentions regarding entering competitions, I find that there is a real and substantial possibility that Ms. Kirkham would have earned prize money of up to $12,000 a year in each of 2011, 2012 and 2013. However, in my view Ms. Kirkham has underestimated the expenses associated with competing internationally as a triathlete. I find it likely that the annual costs associated with competing in triathlon would include approximately $800 in entry fees, at least $3,000 in travel, $3,000 in fees for the Regional Triathlon Centre, and $1,620 for performance care from Dr. Gerrard. That does not include anything for clothing, shoes, and bikes, which, in my view, would likely have been offset by sponsors. On this basis, it is my view that Ms. Kirkham would have incurred costs of approximately <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">$8,500</damage> per year in order to compete in triathlon.
211  For the reasons set out above, Ms. Kirkham has established a real and substantial possibility that the diminishment in her capacity to earn income from triathlon has resulted in a pecuniary loss. However, once the impact of the concussion is reflected, I find that at best she would have broken even in 2011. I assess her diminished capacity to earn income from triathlon for 2012 and 2013 at $3,500 per year for a sum of <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">$7,000</damage>.
212  The total loss of past earning capacity for Ms. Kirkham is thus assessed as <damage type = "past wage loss">$13,200</damage>, comprising the loss of teaching income and prize money.
Loss of Future Earning Capacity
213  If the plaintiff has established both an impairment to her earning capacity and a real and substantial possibility that the impairment will result in a pecuniary loss, the loss may be quantified on either an earnings approach or a capital asset approach: Schenker, at para 51; Perren v. Lalari, , at para 25.
214  The earnings approach is generally appropriate where the loss is more easily measured such as where the plaintiff has some earnings history or where the court can otherwise reasonably estimate what his/her likely future earning capacity will be: Perren, at para 32; Clemas v. Gabrlik, , at para. 170. This approach typically involves an assessment of the plaintiff's estimated annual income loss multiplied by the remaining years of work and then discounted to reflect current value, or alternatively, awarding the plaintiff's entire annual income for a year or two: Pallos v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia  (C.A.), at para. 43; Gilbert v. Bottle, , at para. 233; Clemas, at para. 170. While there is a more mathematical component to this approach, the assessment of damages is still a matter of judgment not mere calculation.
215  The capital asset approach, typically used in cases where the plaintiff has no clear earnings history, involves consideration of a number of factors such as whether the plaintiff has been rendered less capable overall of earning income from all types of employment, is less marketable or attractive as a potential employee, has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities that might otherwise have been open, and is less valuable to herself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market: Brown v. Golaiy  (S.C.), at para. 8.
216  Ms. Kirkham claims that her future earning capacity has been impaired in two respects. First, she claims that but for the car accident she would have completed her PhD a year earlier and, as a result, she has been delayed by a year in embarking upon her ultimate career as a university professor. Second, she claims that but for the accident she would have continued to compete and earn prize money from triathlon for at least another five years.
217  The first aspect of Ms. Kirkham's claim for future loss of income, that she was delayed in embarking upon her career as a university professor, is based on the theory that she will always be behind by a year as a result of the car accident. Her expert economics evidence calculates this loss to range between approximately <damage type = "other">$70,000</damage> (if based on average earnings for female professors at Canadian universities) and approximately <damage type = "other">$118,000</damage> (if based on earnings for male professors at the 75th percentile at American universities). Ms. Kirkham seeks <damage type = "other">$112,760.50</damage> as the average of the amount of earnings between male professors at the 75th percentile at Canadian universities and at American universities. It was not made clear why Ms. Kirkham considered it appropriate to base her claim on average male earnings at the 75th percentile, rather than average female earnings at the 75th percentile.
218  I find that Ms. Kirkham has established that her future earning capacity has been impaired by delay and that there is a real and substantial possibility that she will suffer a pecuniary loss as a result. However, for reasons similar to those expressed by Mr. Justice McEwan in Hillman v. Esaryk, , at paras. 23-25, I consider her suggested approach to assessing the value of that loss to be artificial and to inadequately reflect contingencies associated with her particularly driven and competitive personality.
219  The expert evidence Ms. Kirkham relies upon for quantifying this loss does not appear to reflect the fact that she intends to engage in at least two and perhaps more years of postdoctoral study before attempting to obtain a job as a professor. She testified that this would give her a better chance of securing a professorship but at the cost of a lower income over the next few years. Also, Ms. Kirkham demonstrated that she is an unusually ambitious and driven student. There is every likelihood that she will continue to apply that discipline to her studies and her profession. She has established that she has an extremely competitive nature and in my view will make every effort to catch up to her earnings potential. While she will be somewhat delayed in achieving her full income potential, I am satisfied that a few years down the road, the difference between graduating in 2014 and 2015 will be meaningless.
220  Although Ms. Kirkham has no earnings history, I do agree the earnings approach is more useful than the capital asset approach because Ms. Kirkham's future career plans are firm and, given the evidence as to her abilities and dedication, her career path is likely to unfold as planned. The expert economics evidence indicates that a starting salary for an assistant professor at a Canadian university is between approximately <damage type = "other">$67,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$90,000</damage> per year. Given that this is not a matter of calculation, but rather of assessment, I consider that <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$70,000</damage> will adequately compensate Ms. Kirkham for the one year delay in launching her career.
221  Based on the evidence of Ms. Kirkham and the evidence of Mr. Carlsson, I find that but for the car accident Ms. Kirkham would have continued to compete and earn prize money from triathlon for another five years. She has established a real and substantial possibility that the impairment to her earning capacity will result in a loss of such prize money. The expert economics evidence she tendered estimated her future loss at $10,491 per year, which is the average of Ms. Kirkham's own estimate of prize money and expenses during the three years from 2011 to 2013. For the reasons explained above in the section addressing Ms. Kirkham's claim for loss of past earning capacity, it is my view that Ms. Kirkham's diminished capacity to earn income from triathlon is more appropriately assessed at $3,500 per year. Applying the actuarial multiplier of 4,699 as set out in Ms. Kirkham's expert report, this amounts to <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$16,500</damage> for the five years.
222  The total loss of future earning capacity for Ms. Kirkham is thus assessed as <damage type = "future wage loss">$86,500</damage>, comprising the loss associated with the delay in her career and the loss of prize money.
Cost of future care
223  Ms. Kirkham is entitled to compensation for the cost of future care based on what is reasonably necessary to restore her to her pre-accident condition insofar as that is possible. When full restoration cannot be achieved, the court must strive to assure full compensation through the provision of adequate future care. The award is to be based on what is reasonably necessary on the medical evidence to preserve and promote the plaintiff's mental and physical health: Gignac v. Rozylo, , at paras. 29-30. An assessment of damages for cost of future care is not a precise accounting exercise: Krangle (Guardian ad litem of) v. Brisco, , at para. 21.
224  The test for assessing an appropriate award for the cost of future care is an objective one based on the medical evidence. There must be a medical justification and the claims must be reasonable: Tsalamandris v. McLeod, , at paras. 62-63. The costs are justified if they are medically necessary and likely to be incurred. If the plaintiff has not used the particular service or item in the past, it may be inappropriate to include its costs in the future care award: O'Connell v. Yung, , at paras. 55, 60, 68-70.
225  Ms. Kirkham claims the following as giving rise to costs of future care:
physiotherapy three times per month for a year;
massage therapy once every three to four weeks for a year;
chiropractic treatments once a month for a year after the physiotherapy sessions end;
an athletic therapist or kinesiologist twice a month for three years while she completes her studies;
injections for her hip and knee pain (three treatments);
psychological counseling for a year;
an ergonomic assessment of her home-based workstation;
a lifetime of yoga; and
pain relief medications.
226  For the most part, Ms. Kirkham's claims were supported by her medical evidence. Dr. Boyle expressed the view that although a course of physiotherapy immediately following a soft tissue injury is appropriate, Ms. Kirkham no longer requires formal physiotherapy and is capable of simply exercising on her own. For the reasons already given, I prefer the medical evidence relied upon by Ms. Kirkham.
227  Ms. Kirkham's claim for ongoing physiotherapy for a year is supported by Dr. Finlayson, Dr. Lloyd-Smith, Dr. Gerrard, Ms. Lamy, and Mr. Campbell. On the basis of their evidence, I find that physiotherapy three times a month for the next year is reasonably necessary to preserve and promote Ms. Kirkham's health. Ms. Kirkham's brief of special damages contains a list of each item claimed. That list indicates Ms. Lamy's fee is $50. At three times a month, that amounts to <damage type = "sub-special">$1,800 per year</damage>.
228  Ms. Kirkham's claim for ongoing massage therapy is supported by Dr. Lloyd-Smith and Dr. Gerrard. On the basis of their evidence, I find that massage therapy once a month for a year is reasonably necessary to preserve and promote Ms. Kirkham's health. Ms. Kirkham's brief of special damages indicates the cost of massage therapy at $95 per session. At once a month, that amounts to <damage type = "sub-special">$1,140</damage> for the year.
229  Ms. Kirkham's claim for monthly chiropractic treatments for one year after the physiotherapy is supported by Dr. Lloyd-Smith and Dr. Gerrard. Although Ms. Kirkham had regular chiropractic care prior to the car accident, that was performance care and is different from the rehabilitation care provided by Dr. Gerrard after the accident. I find that chiropractic care once a month for a year following the completion of physiotherapy is reasonably necessary. Ms. Kirkham's brief of special damages indicates the cost of chiropractic care is $45 per session. At once a month, that amounts to <damage type = "sub-special">$540</damage> for a year.
230  Ms. Kirkham's claim for the services of an athletic therapist, kinesiologist or personal trainer such as Mr. Campbell is supported by Dr. Finlayson, but only for a year. Mr. Campbell suggested ongoing treatment for the duration of Ms. Kirkham's graduate and postdoctoral work, but it is not clear from his evidence whether this is in addition to the physiotherapy already addressed above. After considering all of the evidence, I am satisfied that the services of an athletic therapist or personal trainer are reasonably necessary, for a year, particularly if Ms. Kirkham is to have any chance of competing in triathlon again. Ms. Kirkham's brief of special damages indicates Mr. Campbell charges $140 per session. At twice a month, that amounts to <damage type = "sub-special">$3,360</damage> for a year.
231  I am not satisfied that injections for Ms. Kirkham's hip and knee pain are reasonably necessary. She has not yet had such injections. The only medical evidence suggesting such injections is Dr. Finlayson's view that "consideration should be given to" such injections if there is no improvement in her left hip girdle pain with ongoing rehabilitation. There was no evidence from Ms. Kirkham that she would undergo such injections. On balance, I am not satisfied that an award for these injections is justified.
232  Ms. Kirkham's claim for psychological counseling for a year is supported by Dr. Finlayson. However, I am not satisfied that Ms. Kirkham is likely to incur the cost. She saw a sports psychologist three times in 2013 but canceled her last appointment on the basis that she did not think further sessions were required.
233  Ms. Kirkham's claim for an ergonomic assessment of her home-based workstation is supported by Dr. Finlayson. In my view, it also supported by the evidence as a whole, as it is apparent that Ms. Kirkham's pain is exacerbated by computer work and that the modifications to her office workstation have helped. Ms. Kirkham seeks <damage type = "other">$1,200</damage> for the ergonomic assessment. In my view, that amount is justified.
234  Ms. Kirkham's claim for a lifetime of yoga is not, in my view, supported by the medical evidence. Dr. Lloyd-Smith expressed the view that Ms. Kirkham should continue with yoga and/or Pilates sessions to maintain her fitness, strength, flexibility and balance, but he did not express any view as to the appropriate duration of yoga. Mr. Campbell's report does not mention yoga, but he recommended to Ms. Kirkham in the fall of 2012 that she stop her triathlon training and restrict her physical activities to physiotherapy, yoga, Pilates, and strength training. His report simply recommends "some form of ongoing treatment" for the duration of her graduate and postdoctoral work. On consideration of all the evidence, I am satisfied that yoga for three years, while Ms. Kirkham finishes her studies, is justified, at <damage type = "other">$100</damage> per month.
235  Ms. Kirkham's claim for pain relief medication is supported by Dr. Lloyd-Smith. Ms. Kirkham seeks an award of <damage type = "other">$2,000</damage> for tramadol but without any explanation as to how that amount was calculated. Ms. Kirkham's special damages brief indicates that a 30-day supply of tramadol costs approximately $60. On this basis, I award $720 for pain relief medication based on the cost of tramadol for a year.
236  In summary, I assess Ms. Kirkham's cost of future care as follows:
the cost of physiotherapy (<damage type = "sub-future care">$1,800</damage>), massage therapy (<damage type = "sub-future care">$1,140</damage>), an athletic therapist (<damage type = "sub-future care">$3,360</damage>), and pain medication (<damage type = "sub-future care">$720</damage>) for a year, and the cost of chiropractic care (<damage type = "sub-future care">$540</damage>) for the year following the completion of physiotherapy treatment, which amounts to $7,413 using the future cost of care multipliers in Ms. Kirkham's expert economics report,
the cost of an ergonomic assessment at <damage type = "sub-future care">$1,200</damage>, and
the cost of yoga at <damage type = "other">$1,200</damage> per year for three years which amounts to <damage type = "sub-future care">$3,419</damage> using the future cost of care multiplier,
for a total of <damage type = "future care">$12,032</damage>.
Special damages
237  Ms. Kirkham is entitled to recover the reasonable out-of-pocket expenses she incurred as a result of the car accident. Claims for special damages are subject only to the standard of reasonableness; however, when expenses are incurred in relation to treatment aimed at the promotion of a plaintiff's physical or mental well-being, evidence of medical justification for the expense is a factor in determining reasonableness: Redl v. Sellin, , at para. 55.
238  Ms. Kirkham claims <damage type = "other">$35,683.91</damage> in special damages. That amount relates primarily to the costs she incurred for chiropractic care, massage therapy, physiotherapy, Pilates, and yoga. It also includes costs for medication and equipment such as a laptop stand and ice packs.
239  The defendant objects to Ms. Kirkham's special damages claim on two bases. First, the defendant submits that Ms. Kirkham's treatment was self-directed and excessive and did not follow a course set in consultation with a medical doctor. The defendant points out that Dr. Hall's recommendation of physiotherapy and Dr. Shiu's recommendation of physiotherapy, massage therapy, and chiropractic care were not established at trial, other than through Ms. Kirkham's hearsay. Accordingly, the defendant submits that on the medical evidence, Ms. Kirkham had not been recommended such treatments until, at the earliest, her first visit with Dr. Lloyd-Smith on May 5, 2011. The defendant submits that although Dr. Lloyd-Smith notes that Ms. Kirkham had instituted physiotherapy, massage therapy and chiropractic care once or twice a week, his report declined to endorse these treatments.
240  I do not accept that submission. Dr. Lloyd-Smith recommended continuing physiotherapy, massage therapy, chiropractic care, medication, trigger point injections yoga, and Pilates as future care. He was clearly aware that Ms. Kirkham had been engaging in these treatments since the car accident. While he may not have specifically said that he recommended she do so from the beginning, he certainly did not indicate that he disagreed with these therapies. While Dr. Lloyd-Smith did not see Ms. Kirkham until May 5, 2011, even Dr. Boyle testified as to the value in physiotherapy for the first six to eight weeks following a soft tissue injury. Finally, the medical evidence tendered by Ms. Kirkham as a whole established a consensus for ongoing physiotherapy, massage therapy, yoga, and Pilates with an eventual resumption of chiropractic care. If all of these treatments are recommended into the future, it is reasonable to infer that they were equally recommended in the past.
241  In my view, it is also necessary to keep in mind Ms. Kirkham's specific situation. She was an elite athlete who was endeavouring to regain her status. She cannot be faulted for her efforts in this regard. What is reasonable for Ms. Kirkham may not be reasonable for a plaintiff who had a more sedentary pre-accident lifestyle. Considering all the evidence, it is my view that the costs incurred by Ms. Kirkham meet the standard of reasonableness.
242  The defendant also objects to Ms. Kirkham's claim for special damages on the basis that as an elite athlete she received chiropractic treatments from Dr. Gerrard for performance care before the car accident and would have continued to incur that cost even if the car accident had not occurred. In my view, the principle that an expense cannot be recovered if it can be shown that an independent cause such as pre-existing injury would have necessitated the expense in any event is inapplicable to Ms. Kirkham's situation. She was not receiving chiropractic care for rehabilitation of injuries prior to the car accident. She was receiving performance care that assisted her in her efforts to become a top level triathlete. Dr. Gerrard testified that the nature of the care he provided to Ms. Kirkham after the car accident was different than that provided beforehand. In my view, disallowing Ms. Kirkham's claim for the costs of chiropractic care she incurred after the accident on the basis that she received performance care before the accident would be akin to reducing a plaintiff's special damages claim on the basis that the injuries suffered by the plaintiff have rendered the plaintiff incapable of participating in pre-accident activities and thereby have saved the plaintiff the costs associated with those activities.
243  For the foregoing reasons I find that Ms. Kirkham is entitled to reimbursement for the special damages she has claimed in the amount of <damage type = "special">$35,683.91</damage>.
CONCLUSION
244  In summary, the damages awarded to Ms. Kirkham are as follows:
Non-pecuniary damages <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$120,000</damage> 
Loss of past earning capacity <damage type = "past wage loss">13,200</damage> 
Loss of future earning capacity <damage type = "future wage loss">86,500</damage> 
Cost of future care <damage type = "future care">12,032</damage> 
Special damages <damage type = "special">35,684</damage> 
Total: <damage type = "total">$267,416</damage> 
245  If the parties are unable to agree on costs, they may speak to that issue.
L.A. WARREN J.
End of Document
Neff v. Patry, [2008] B.C.J. No. 209
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Victoria, British Columbia
R.R. Holmes J.
Heard: March 19-23, 26-29 and May 14-18, 2007;
written submissions, May-June, 2007.
Judgment: February 12, 2008.
Docket: 97-3819
Registry: Victoria
[2008] B.C.J. No. 209   |   2008 BCSC 163   |   164 A.C.W.S. (3d) 540   |   54 C.C.L.T. (3d) 280   |   2008 CarswellBC 238
Between Barrie Neff, Plaintiff, and Linda Patry, also known as Linda Kelso and Terry Diane Anderson, also known as Terry Diane Laming, Defendants
(193 paras.)
Case Summary
Tort law — Negligence — Evidence and proof — Action commenced by Neff seeking compensatory and punitive damages for malicious prosecution, abuse of process, negligence, and intentional infliction of mental suffering — On September 30, 1995, the plaintiff was arrested by the RCMP at his law office on an arrest warrant issued upon an information sworn by a peace officer, alleging two counts of criminal conduct, one count concerning the defendant Patry, the other the defendant Anderson — All charges were later stayed — Action allowed — Defendants were jointly and severally liable to the plaintiff for damages of $50,000 — Defendant Patry was additionally liable for $10,000 punitive damages.
Tort law — Abuse of legal procedure — Abuse of process — Malicious prosecution — Action commenced by Neff seeking compensatory and punitive damages for malicious prosecution, abuse of process, negligence, and intentional infliction of mental suffering — On September 30, 1995, the plaintiff was arrested by the RCMP at his law office on an arrest warrant issued upon an information sworn by a peace officer, alleging two counts of criminal conduct, one count concerning the defendant Patry, the other the defendant Anderson — All charges were later stayed — Action allowed — Defendants were jointly and severally liable to the plaintiff for damages of <damage type = "general">$50,000</damage> — Defendant Patry was additionally liable for <damage type = "punitive">$10,000</damage> punitive damages.
Action commenced by Neff seeking compensatory and punitive damages for malicious prosecution, abuse of process, negligence, and intentional infliction of mental suffering -- In September 1995, the plaintiff was a lawyer practicing in Duncan, BC -- On September 30, 1995, the plaintiff was arrested by the RCMP at his law office on an arrest warrant issued upon an information sworn by Foster, a peace officer, alleging two counts of criminal conduct, one count concerning the defendant Patry, the other the defendant Anderson -- On October 30, 1995, the charges relating to the defendant Patry were stayed by the Crown, and a new information regarding only the defendant Anderson was sworn -- On November 21, 1995, that charge was stayed by the Attorney General -- As a result of the actions of the defendants in respect of the judicial review, complaint to the Law Society, and his being charged, arrested, and detained, the plaintiff commenced this action -- HELD: Action allowed -- Defendants were jointly and severally liable to the plaintiff for damages of <damage type = "general">$50,000</damage> -- Defendant Patry was additionally liable for <damage type = "punitive">$10,000</damage> punitive damages -- The actions of the defendants were vindictive, tenacious and unrelenting in their effort to maintain the charges their actions precipitated -- There was no basis for defences of justification or truth -- Punitive damages were warranted with respect to Patry as she had escalated a complaint of bias against the plaintiff as arbitrator to ultimately have him arrested on a criminal charge as a "stalker", with innuendo from his alleged castration that he was a sex offender -- Patry's accusations were untrue and without any appropriate basis for her to be giving medical opinion.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Criminal Code, s. 264(3)(b)
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: J.A.S. Legh.
Counsel for the Defendant Lindy Patry: D.A. Farquhar.
The Defendant Terry Diane Anderson: In Person.
Reasons for Judgment
R.R. HOLMES J.
INTRODUCTION
1  On September 30, 1995 the plaintiff was a lawyer practicing in Duncan, British Columbia. At mid-afternoon on that date he was arrested by the R.C.M.P. at his law office on an arrest warrant [Ex. 9, Tab 198] issued upon an information sworn by Mr. Bill Foster, a peace officer, alleging two counts of criminal conduct contrary to s. 264(3)(b) of the Criminal Code, one count concerning the defendant Patry, the other the defendant Anderson [Ex. 9, Tab 197].
2  The plaintiff appeared in Provincial Court in Victoria on October 2, 1995, and was remanded to October 16, 1995.
3  On October 30, 1995, the charges relating to the defendant Patry were stayed by the Crown [Ex. 9, Tab 207], and a new information regarding only the defendant Anderson was sworn. On November 21, 1995, that charge was stayed by the Attorney General [Ex. 9, Tab 210].
4  As a result of the actions of the defendants in respect of the judicial review, complaint to the Law Society, and his being charged, arrested, and detained, the plaintiff pursues this action for compensatory and punitive damages for malicious prosecution, abuse of process, negligence (against the defendant Patry only), and intentional infliction of mental suffering.
HISTORY
5  Some chronology of the convoluted history amongst the parties is necessary to an understanding of the events in issue.
6  The relationship of the plaintiff and the defendant Anderson, the manner in which the plaintiff and defendant Patry came into conflict, and the interaction between the defendants Anderson and Patry, form a bizarre background to the plaintiff's claims.
PLAINTIFF AND DEFENDANT ANDERSON
7  The plaintiff is 65 years of age and currently works as a pipe fitter in the tar sands of northern Alberta. He is a law school graduate, who articled with a Victoria law firm and was called to the Bar in 1977.
8  The defendant Anderson, a realtor, has had varied employment and small business pursuits over the years. She has had a disability since January 1986, when she sustained a head injury with consequent Post Traumatic Stress Disorder resulting from an assault during a robbery attempt at her place of employment.
9  The plaintiff first met the defendant Anderson in the summer of 1986, when he acted on behalf of the defendant Anderson's family and other trailer park residents in a dispute with their landlord. In the summer of 1988, the defendant Anderson contacted the plaintiff regarding her divorce, and from the fall of 1988 a romantic relationship ensued.
10  The defendant Anderson, from inception of her injuries in the robbery, had difficulty in obtaining recognition by the Workers Compensation Board of the scope and effect of her injuries, and their profound effect upon her. The defendant Anderson did not receive timely, necessary, and appropriate treatment for her Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, and still continues with a serious memory deficit and need for psychological counselling or therapy.
11  The defendant Anderson blames the plaintiff for the break-up of her marriage, and believes that their relationship was one of abuse to her and her children.
12  The plaintiff's evidence is that he cared for the defendant and tried to help her over the years, and denies any suggestion of abuse.
13  The defendant Anderson characterizes her relationship with the plaintiff as founded on fear; and claims fear for her own safety, as well as that of her family and others.
14  The defendant Anderson now portrays the plaintiff as a violent person and alleges that he had asked her to commit suicide, jointly commit suicide, threatened to kill her and her husband, and said that he could have her father killed. Ms. Anderson alleges the plaintiff, in her presence, engaged in violence with her husband, and that he has stalked and harassed her. The defendant Anderson also referred in testimony to an incident of violence by the plaintiff that she witnessed at his home, which involved three young men and led to his pleading guilty to criminal charges.
15  The defendant Anderson constantly accuses the plaintiff of "seducing her away from her husband". The plaintiff denies that is what occurred, and testifies that the defendant Anderson had assured him her marriage was over before he pursued a relationship with her. The plaintiff never acted for her in respect of divorce, but he did refer her to a lawyer.
16  The plaintiff characterizes the relationship with the defendant Anderson as being "on and off" over the years. The plaintiff found the defendant Ms. Anderson was subject to mercurial mood swings and to have periods exhibiting intense hatred toward him.
17  The plaintiff was smitten with Ms. Anderson, but came to realize that marriage to her was not appropriate in light of the defendant Anderson's mental health issues. It is his evidence they tried every avenue to obtain help and treatment for her.
18  Although they would spend a good deal of time together, it appears they never actually lived together. The plaintiff was employed as a solicitor for the Lower Nicola Indian Band in Merritt from May 1993 through August 1994, and lived in Merritt travelling to Vancouver Island on some weekends.
19  The plaintiff and a woman named Ms. Bones started a relationship in December 1993, the plaintiff moved to Duncan in August 1994, and they became engaged. The relationship ended at Christmas 1994.
20  The plaintiff was employed from 1984 to 1989 as house counsel for West Coast Savings Credit Union. In 1989 there was a merger of credit unions, the plaintiff's employment was terminated, and he was given a severance package. The plaintiff was 50 years old and despite his best efforts, he was not able to find employment for approximately two years. He was severely depressed and received psychiatric treatment. The plaintiff and defendant Anderson, during this period when the plaintiff was not working, were drinking excessively, and they likely were alcoholics. They would at times quarrel, yell, use profanities, and at times be verbally hurtful of one another.
21  The plaintiff says that apart from one occasion, he was never physically violent to the defendant Anderson. That one occasion was when she openly taunted him regarding her sexual relationship with someone else, and he placed his hands on her neck and shook her.
22  The plaintiff admits that he may, in frustration of her constant talk of suicide, have told her to go ahead. He admits there was a time they talked of joint suicide when they were both depressed and saw that as the only way out.
23  The plaintiff denies making the death threats she alleges against her father, her husband, and her family. He admits there may have been some comments spoken as bravado and meant as support to her, regarding her father. The defendant Anderson alleges a history of horrific sexual abuse by her father as a child; she had charged him criminally and his prosecution was extant during part of her relationship with the plaintiff.
24  The defendant Anderson alleges the plaintiff showed her a sadomasochistic video, and told her he had shown it to his daughter. She alleged the plaintiff committed sexual improprieties with his daughter. The plaintiff vehemently denies these allegations, and his daughter, in evidence, wholly supports the denial.
25  The plaintiff did commit an act of violence to which he plead guilty and received a suspended sentence. The offence occurred in 1992 at his townhouse residence, and the defendant Anderson was present. The plaintiff's evidence is that three youths tried to kick in his door, so he grabbed a baseball bat and chased them to their parked van. The plaintiff smashed the van's windshield and as a result one of the youths received an eye injury from fragmented glass.
26  This incident occurred during the time the plaintiff was unemployed, depressed, taking medication and drinking heavily. He admits candidly that he "lost it" and had over-reacted. He said it was an isolated incident which he very much regrets.
27  The credibility of the defendant Anderson is seriously suspect. During the tenure of the relationship the defendant Anderson, while professing to be the victim of violence, living in fear of the plaintiff doing harm to her, her family, and acquaintances, wrote dozens of letters to the plaintiff proclaiming him to be the finest of men and the best thing that ever happened to her.
28  Ms. Anderson testified that whatever she wrote was the truth, and offered no explanation for the stark contrast in the allegations she raises against the plaintiff, and the dozens of her letters of love, praise, gratitude, and admiration. Fortunately, the plaintiff saved many of her letters and is able to roughly date the times they were written.
29  I conclude the plaintiff loved the defendant Anderson, but realized she was a deeply troubled person with mental health issues, and although he tried to assist her in obtaining help and treatment, he realized marriage to her was out of the question.
30  The defendant Anderson appears a mentally troubled and unstable woman badly damaged from incest in her childhood and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder following her head injury in 1988. She had a "love-hate" relationship with the plaintiff, as she considered that he reneged on a promise to marry her after seducing her from her husband. On one level, she views the plaintiff as ruining her life, and she appears in respect of matters involved in this action to be motivated by revenge.
31  The plaintiff and the defendant Patry first met in January 1992 when he was appointed as arbitrator of a landlord-tenant dispute commenced by Mr. Kirzinger as tenant against the defendant Patry as owner of the house he was renting. The plaintiff held hearings January 28, February 4, March 11, and May 27, 1992.
32  The plaintiff gave an oral decision on February 4, 1992 and written reasons followed February 17, 1992. A final decision concluding the matter which included incidental findings of misconduct by the defendant Patry as landlord was given in June 1992.
33  The defendant Patry complained of the plaintiff to several persons at the Residential Tenancy Branch throughout the hearing period, claiming that the plaintiff was unprofessional and biased.
34  The plaintiff's contract with the Residential Tenancy Branch was not renewed in March of 1992. There had been some complaints that the plaintiff's demeanour was pompous. Ms. Rossley, his superior, confirmed that there was no problem with the plaintiff as an arbitrator, and she had no difficulties in working with him. The resolution of the defendant Patry's arbitration was his last arbitration.
35  On August 17, 1992, the defendant Patry filed a lengthy Petition for a Judicial Review of the plaintiff's decisions of February 17, April 13 and June 24, 1992 [Ex. 7, Tab 129].
36  In early September, the defendant Patry wrote to both Ms. Rossley and to Ms. Rice, the Assistant Deputy Minister, with copies to the Ombudsman for B.C.
37  Allegations of bias, unprofessional conduct and an unfair arbitration hearing were made against the plaintiff. On October 6, 1992, the defendant Patry swore an affidavit, with exhibits of 177 pages, which was filed on October 8, 1992, attacking the plaintiff and the arbitration process [Ex. 7, Tab 131].
38  Ms. Rossley swore an affidavit in the Judicial Review proceeding in contradiction of what the defendant Patry had deposed. In particular, Ms. Rossley never advised the defendant Patry that she had the right to ask that the plaintiff step down as arbitrator on her request (although she could make the request with the Arbitrator to decide). Ms. Rossley never expressed the view she thought there was bias on the part of the plaintiff, or that the plaintiff should have instructed the tenant to serve a copy of the Order on the defendant Patry [Ex. 8, Tab 136].
39  As the Petition was highly personalized and critical of the plaintiff, he was instructed at government expense to retain Peter Butler Q.C. as counsel to represent him in the Judicial Review.
40  On January 29, 1993 the forceful attack launched by the defendant Patry against the plaintiff personally was demonstrated when she swore a 31 page affidavit outlining complaints that the plaintiff lied, confused her, intimidated her and her witnesses, interfered, butted in and was biased [Ex. 8, Tab 137].
41  The defendant Patry made serious accusations against the plaintiff of tape recording the proceedings without her knowledge. That was untrue as the tape recorder was large and central on the desk during hearings, and the tenant Mr. Kirzinger confirms his knowledge of its use. The defendant Patry alleged that tapes were altered. Mr. Justice Melvin, who reviewed the tapes that existed, found them invaluable in concluding the tenor of the hearing, and contrary to the defendant Patry's allegations of impropriety and bias.
42  It is to be noted Mr. Kirzinger does not support the flagrant abuses of the plaintiff's behaviour alleged by the defendant Patry.
43  The first hearing on the Judicial Review commenced January 29, 1993 before Mr. Justice Hutchison. The plaintiff attended and was accompanied by the defendant Ms. Anderson. Ms. Anderson heard the defendant Patry make her wide-ranging accusations regarding the plaintiff's conduct at the hearing. It was following listening to the defendant Patry speak about him in Court that he was so enraged with her false accusations that he did, in speaking to the defendant Anderson, refer to the defendant Patry as "a bitch". Ms. Anderson had suggested that he had referred to the defendant Patry as "a bitch" prior to the hearing day.
44  The defendant Anderson recalled that she had once seen or met the defendant Patry, who was the attending doctor when a friend had a baby. The plaintiff in May 1993 moved to Merritt B.C. to take up employment with an Indian Band. In the first half of 1993 the defendant Anderson wrote to the plaintiff expressing her love and respect, and that he was a "good man", the "Greatest Man" and that she had "died a thousand deaths since you moved away" [Ex. 8, Tab 138-140].
45  In June 1993, the defendant Patry swore an affidavit in the Judicial Review proceeding which with exhibits exceeded 120 pages [Ex. 8, Tab 141]. The affidavit repeats and expands her views as to the plaintiff's bias, dishonesty, arrogance, and unjust conduct. The affidavit also focuses an attack of the plaintiff on her analysis of the existing tape recordings, allegations of editing, tampering with the tapes, or their destruction.
46  By November 1993, the defendants Anderson and Patry had met and started discussions about the plaintiff. The contact was made by the defendant Anderson to the defendant Patry. The defendant Patry taped several conversions with the defendant Anderson over concern of what she was being told, but she appears to have unreservedly accepted it as true.
47  The defendants collaborated from late 1993 to February 1994 with personal meetings and telephone conversations. The defendant Anderson also worked for the defendant Patry for a short time. The result of their discussions was the drafting of an affidavit in the Judicial Review proceeding which the defendant Anderson swore.
48  During this same period, from the fall of 1993 to February 1994, the plaintiff was in Merritt employed by the Lower Nicola Indian Band, and the defendant Anderson continued to write him expressing her love for him and that he was "one fine gentleman" [Ex. 8, Tab 143-144].
49  In December 1993 the plaintiff started his relationship with Ms. Bones. In August 1994, the plaintiff moved to Duncan B.C., became engaged to be married, and was employed by a law firm in Duncan.
50  On February 2, 1994, the defendant Anderson swore her affidavit in the Judicial Review proceeding, but it was not filed. The drafting of the affidavit was likely that of the defendant Patry, certainly with her influence, and incorporated matters that she was told by the defendant Anderson in their many discussions regarding the plaintiff. I accept the affidavit was largely a blend of untruths, partial truths distorted by removal from context, and with misleading exaggeration.
51  The defendant Patry considered the affidavit supported her attack upon the plaintiff as it was proof, inter alia, that he was unpredictable, mentally unstable, manipulative, prejudiced, and lacked for honesty and morals.
52  In February 1994, the defendant Patry was attempting to enlist the aid of the police in respect of possible criminal offences committed by the plaintiff on the basis of her allegations he tampered with the tape recordings from the hearing.
53  A letter to police of February 28, 1994 [Ex. 8, Tab 150] was in furtherance of an earlier conversation of November 24, 1993. The letter contains several false statements about the plaintiff, including that he had lost his job with West Coast Savings Credit Union for incompetence, had to quit private practice because of an assault of three men, that he fled Vancouver Island due to publicity, and that he was no longer a member in good standing of the Law Society of B.C.
54  The defendant Patry purports to offer her medical opinion that the plaintiff:
... has a problem with mental psychosis and/or paranoid compulsive personality disorder and was on anti-psychotic medication for extended periods and has been followed by a psychiatrist on a long term basis ...
... according to his ex-girlfriend, he has several times threatened to kill her and has attempted to choke her, and he demonstrates violent psychotic behavior.
55  On March 1, 1994, the defendant Patry sent the police department a copy of the defendant Anderson's affidavit and asked it be reviewed but not acted upon without discussion with her, because she was concerned for the safety of her and the defendant Anderson and their children.
56  On March 7, 1994, the defendant Patry took another tack in her attack on the plaintiff by writing to the Law Society of B.C. to urge they take disciplinary action. The letter contained affidavits in the Judicial Review proceeding (including the unfiled affidavit of the defendant Anderson which she did not want revealed). Among the many accusations raised in the letter is again reference to her opinion as a physician that: "... he needed psychiatric help and that he was not fully in touch with the reality of the situation".
57  The Law Society wrote the defendant Patry on April 18, 1994, advising they would not be asking the plaintiff for an explanation at that time. The plaintiff became aware in April 1994 that the defendant Patry had complained about him.
58  At this time, the defendant Anderson, by letter of April 22, 1994 wrote asking the plaintiff to "... forgive the pain and cruelties she had caused by lashing out her pain and fury" on him [Ex. 8, Tab 155].
59  On May 13, 1994 the Law Society wrote the defendant Patry saying they had given the plaintiff a copy of the defendant Anderson's unfiled affidavit.
60  On May 16, 1994 the defendant Anderson wrote to the plaintiff in Merritt, having previously said she would not write further, as he had not responded to her prior letters. In this letter she again expresses her love for the plaintiff and reiterates that she took out her rage and pain on him [Ex. 8, Tab 159].
61  The plaintiff wrote the defendant Anderson June 1, 1994, after learning for the first time of the affidavit she had sworn, expressing that he did not know she hated him so much [Ex. 7, Tab 125, p. 49]. She replied on June 15, giving her reasons for her actions [Ex. 7, Tab 163].
62  The Law Society, on June 7, 1994, wrote that they would not pursue the defendant Patry's allegations, as they were speculative and unproven [Ex. 8, Tab 162]. The defendant Patry wrote a letter June 13, 1994 objecting and saying that release of the defendant Anderson's affidavit jeopardized the lives of the defendants' families. On July 26, 1994, the Law Society wrote in reply and explained again the reason for release of the affidavit.
63  On July 27, 1994 the defendant Anderson wrote the plaintiff a threatening letter [Ex. 8, Tab 165], but a week later on August 4, 1994, she wrote she was not going to pursue legal action and ending stating "... I was hurt because we never married, I just lashed out with everything I had" [Ex. 8, Tab 166].
64  In August 1994, the plaintiff moved to Duncan to live with Ms. Bones, and on September 15, 1994, the defendant Anderson's affidavit sworn February 2, 1994, was filed in the Judicial Review proceeding.
65  In the fall of 1994, the defendant Anderson continued to write the plaintiff expressing her love, and in particular wrote on October 15, 1994 a letter of apology and suggested he use the letter to clear his name and reputation that she felt was damaged due to his involvement with her. The letter expresses her love, desire and admiration for him. She describes him as a "man of great character, intellect, passion, talent, tenderness and sensitivity".
66  The letter is a powerful admission of how she had wronged the plaintiff in her involvement with the defendant Patry [Ex. 8, Tab 169].
67  The relationship of the plaintiff and Ms. Bones ended at Christmas 1994, and in January 1995 the plaintiff and defendant Anderson met and discussed the damage her affidavit created. It was agreed that to correct matters she would swear a new affidavit which would adhere strictly to the truth. To assist her, it was arranged for her to work with David Johnson, a psychologist who had treated her and for whom she had the greatest respect and trust. The plaintiff, at David Johnson's suggestion, attended some of their sessions.
68  In February 1995, the defendant Anderson wrote a long unsigned Statement apparently in explanation of why she swore her first affidavit, that she wished to retract and that she was working with David Johnson to help her clear up inaccuracies in her first affidavit [Ex. 8, Tabs 171-173].
69  It is of interest that in one of the sessions with David Johnson, the defendant Anderson became angry with the plaintiff, swung a briefcase at him, and broke his arm. She also recalled past anger when she slit the tires on his car, slashed his car convertible top, and taunted and tormented him.
70  The plaintiff became upset when the defendant Anderson would not sign the new affidavit drafted, and on February 29, 1995 wrote to David Johnson requesting he tell her not to contact him again or interfere with him or he would get a restraining order against her. He stated he did not care if she signed the affidavit or not [Ex. 1, Tab 7].
71  The plaintiff on March 7, 1995, after meetings with David Johnson, swore a new affidavit [Ex. 8, Tab 174] and the plaintiff provided the defendant Anderson with a letter of Release against legal action conditional on her maintaining the truth.
72  The plaintiff arranged for the payment of the defendant Anderson's phone bill for the one month period in January to February 1995, when the process to create the supplementary affidavit occurred. The bill disclosed forty long distance calls from the defendant Anderson in Victoria to the plaintiff in Duncan.
73  Counsel for the plaintiff arranged payment to David Johnson for his counselling services related to the supplementary affidavit. When the defendant Anderson learned of the payment of David Johnson's account, she became irate and claimed he had breached her trust.
74  On March 31, 1995 the plaintiff left the employ of Orchard & Co. in Duncan and opened his own office. The parting was not on good terms, and the plaintiff was asked to leave. He had been working on some files for a local Indian Band and when he started his own practice, they requested the files be transferred to him.
75  From April through September 1995, the defendant Anderson wrote a number of friendly letters to the plaintiff which, in varying degrees, expressed her love and need for him [Exs. 8 and 9, Tabs 176-183; Tabs 185 and 186]. One letter in the summer of 1995 was an exception to this pattern, with its tone and style of writing indicative of anger [Ex. 9, Tab 184].
76  A letter written in September 1995 expressed her love and wishes to marry him [Ex. 9, Tab 186].
77  The defendant Anderson left a note on September 12, 1995 for the plaintiff to call her [Ex. 9, Tab 187]. The plaintiff left several messages for the defendant Anderson to call him, and when she was not returning calls, he drove to her apartment, sat in his car or on a park bench to await her return. The defendant Anderson was home, but would not answer the door. There is no evidence the messages left on her answering machine were threatening or harassing, nor did his waiting to see if she would return home in the circumstances be considered "stalking".
78  The defendant Anderson swore another supplementary affidavit September 20, 1995 and filed it that day [Ex. 9, Tab 188]. This was her third affidavit and alleges her second affidavit filed to correct her first affidavit was coerced by the plaintiff.
79  On September 22, 1995 the defendant Patry filed a statement with Victoria police referring to her earlier letter in February 1994 concerning the hearing tapes.
80  She stated she was applying September 25, 1995 for a no contact order and that she feared for herself, children and family and the plaintiff was the source of the threat to her. She wanted police protection for each of the defendants as they were in physical danger [Ex. 9, Tab 189]. The same day, the defendant Anderson filed a statement with police canvassing her historical accusations about the plaintiff over the period of their relationship, and claimed her second affidavit was coerced by the plaintiff threatening suicide if she did not comply, and that he bullied, screamed and yelled, berated and belittled her until she caved in. She wanted a no contact order to protect herself and her family [Ex. 9, Tab 190].
81  September 25, 1995 the defendant Patry, supported by the defendant Anderson, sought an ex parte order by application in the Judicial Review proceeding for a no contact order. The application contained a long series of allegations including threatening, harassing and stalking the defendants and Ms. Bones and they all feared for their lives and safety [Ex. 9, Tab 192].
82  The defendant Patry filed her own affidavit quoting fear in serving affidavits, and alleging the plaintiff was criminally harassing and stalking the defendants and Ms. Bones, and he was instructing the defendant Anderson to commit suicide, thereby intimidating a witness into swearing a supplementary affidavit [Ex. 9, Tab 193].
83  On September 27, 1995, the defendant Patry delivered a seventeen page statement to the Victoria police. It contains false statements, accusations, exaggeration and fantasy concerning the plaintiff. It was extremely vindictive and laced with her views and opinions. One of dozens of the allegations made was that she knew the plaintiff was dishonest, threatening, and extremely manipulative, without scruples, but further in her opinion "... he was a narcissistic sociopath capable of anything criminal" [Ex. 9, Tab 194].
84  On September 26, 1995, the defendant Anderson made a three page written statement to police [Ex. 9, Tab 195].
85  On September 28, 1995 a report was made by the police to Crown counsel on the basis of the defendants' statements. The report proposed a charge of Criminal harassment under s. 264 (1) of the Criminal Code [Ex. 9, Tab 191].
86  On September 30, 1995, an information was sworn by a peace officer, Bill Foster, charging two counts under s. 264(3)(b) of the Criminal Code and a warrant for the plaintiff's arrest issued [Ex. 9, Tab 198].
87  The plaintiff was then arrested at 2:30 p.m. that day at his office in Duncan.
88  On October 2, 1995, the plaintiff was remanded to October 16, 1995, and the defendant Patry wrote an "urgent" request to the Law Society that they take criminal action against the plaintiff [Ex. 9, Tab 200]. The Judicial Review also proceeded to hearing that day before Mr. Justice Melvin, and it was adjourned sine die the following day because of the plaintiff's arrest.
89  On October 7, 1995, the defendant Anderson provided police and Crown with fourteen pages of allegations and requests for charges of corruption against David Johnson, and six named lawyers including Peter Butler Q.C., who were said to be conspirators to discredit, hurt and possibly kill her to protect the plaintiff. She alleges there was a cover-up and suspicion of organized crime and corruption.
90  On October 13, 1995, the defendant Patry demanded to know why Crown did not lay charges regarding the supplementary affidavit of Ms. Anderson. On October 19, 1995 the defendant Anderson inquired of Crown if it could look into corruption in the Law Society.
91  On October 24, 1955, the defendant Patry met with Crown and was told charges were to be stayed. The defendant stated she would not let the matter die, and would go to Crown's superiors and the press.
92  On October 30, 1995, the charges relating to the defendant Patry were stayed and a new Information regarding the defendant Anderson was sworn [Ex. 9, Tab 207].
93  On November 21, 1995, the charges relating to the defendant Anderson were stayed [Ex. 9, Tab 210].
94  The following day, the defendant Anderson spoke to Crown and was yelling and belligerent. She was threatening to go to the Attorney-General and the press, and that she would "have Crown's job".
95  On November 28, 1995, the defendant Anderson met again with Crown and maintained she wanted a criminal conviction. She was told it was impossible to prove criminal harassment of her.
96  A month later on December 29, 1995, the defendant Anderson wrote the plaintiff of her love for him, but stated she had to defend herself, the defendant Patry and Ms. Bones from his "rage and vengeance".
97  She apologizes for the "... trouble we made ..." and that she missed seeing him every day and night [Ex. 9, Tab 212].
98  Two days later on December 31, 1995, the defendant Anderson again wrote to the plaintiff that "... If things don't work out properly with your new girlfriend and you'd like to work things out with me, please call. I am still very much in love with you." It ended "To the Greatest Man I have ever known".
99  In stark contrast, the defendant Anderson wrote the Law Society, enclosing thirty-nine documents and continuing her allegations of criminal conduct against the plaintiff [Ex. 9, Tab 214].
100  On January 15, 1996, she wrote the defendant Patry to thank her for her help in getting away from the plaintiff, and her dedication and assistance to help her break free from this cruel and vengeful man. On the same day, she wrote the Law Society [Ex. 9, Tab 217] demanding an immediate investigation and oral hearing. She also wrote that day to Crown and demanded a hearing before a judge [Ex. 9, Tab 216].
101  Through the months of February, March and April 1996, the defendant Anderson kept up her insistence that the Crown take action on her many allegations against the plaintiff, and also pursued having the Law Society hold a hearing [Ex. 9, Tab 219-226].
102  On April 16, 1996, Mr. Justice Melvin dismissed the defendant Patry's "ill conceived" petition with costs after reviewing the tapes from the hearing and defendant Patry's sixty page brief.
103  The defendant Anderson kept up correspondence to the Law Society although the tenor of her letters changed significantly. On August 6, 1996 she wrote, in part:
David Johnston was the kindest, most generous man I ever met. He provided me with safe free counselling. He proved there are good men in the world that care.
104  She wrote further that she realized that she hurt Barrie (the plaintiff):
... due to my own deep, unresolved traumas and reaction to overwhelming losses. I am sorry and willing to make restitution if he so requests. [Ex. 19]
105  The defendant Patry, on September 28, 1998, was still writing the Law Society that her complaint against the Plaintiff ought not to have closed. The Law Society responded it was closed, the complaint speculative [Ex. 9, Tab 235].
106  There was some contact between the plaintiff and the defendant Anderson over the ensuing years despite the existence of this lawsuit. Their interaction for the most part seemed relatively caring and civil. That state was however abruptly broken in 2005 when the defendant Anderson candidly admits she informed the R.C.M.P. that the plaintiff was responsible for the murder of a young person, "Jennifer" in the B.C. interior. The plaintiff was pulled from his jobsite in Alberta by police, questioned and released. Astoundingly, the defendant Anderson testified she had no particular basis to accuse him of the murder, other than she believed it and that he was capable of murder.
POST ARREST
107  The evidence of the plaintiff is that following his arrest his life went into a tailspin. He was ashamed and publicly humiliated. His arrest was reported in the local Duncan and the Victoria press. His criminal counsel at the time observed in her evidence that he just seemed to crumble in he aftermath of his arrest. He was unable to focus and could not practice law effectively. He was dysfunctional and incapable of basic administrative detail. He got into trouble with the Law Society over inability to keep his trust accounts properly maintained. His practice dwindled and he ceased to practice December 31, 1995.
108  The plaintiff was depressed and suicidal and completely unable to function normally. He was living in his car, unable to afford accommodation. He was forced to obtain social assistance; he became reclusive and felt shunned by his friends.
109  On Christmas day 1995, he attempted suicide by a massive dosage of Aspirin. On January 6, 1996, his birthday, he tried again.
110  The plaintiff feels extremely fortunate that he met Ms. Parr, a woman he attributes to saving his life. He met her in the early spring of 1996 and lived with her and her two sons until 1997, when he obtained employment with the Indian Affairs Department and moved to Vancouver. He was supervisor of a unit of eight to ten lawyers working on the estates of natives. He held that position in excess of a year and a half. The plaintiff liked the job but would "break down" at times and experienced crying jags. In the summer of 1999 his contract expired and it was not renewed.
111  The plaintiff following his arrest had severe sleep problems and could only sleep for two or three hours at a time. He fought his depression, and quit liquor and drugs, but started to over-eat in compensation. His weight ballooned to an extreme high of 321 pounds, precipitated a heart attack and became a wake up call for him. He was in extremely poor physical health.
112  The plaintiff applied unsuccessfully for many positions after leaving Indian Affairs. It seemed fruitless for him to continue to attempt to obtain work as a lawyer, and he eventually went to Alberta where it was suggested he could become a pipe-fitter/high-rigger. He began to work in the tar sands and oil fields. It is extremely hard physical work, involving climbing high ladders in adverse weather conditions, and working long hours.
113  The work sites are isolated and living conditions are basic, can be unsanitary, and are crowded. The plaintiff feels the hard physical labour has been his saviour, and he has met the challenges of doing so at his older age. He should be very proud of what he has accomplished in rebuilding his health and his life.
114  The plaintiff's hard work has also been extremely rewarding financially. It has far surpassed what he had earned, or was likely to earn, in the practice of law. In 1993-1994, for two day a week part-time work the plaintiff had income of approximately <damage type = "other">$35,000</damage>. In 1995, the year of his arrest, after payment of his debts he had income of less than $100. In 1996 and 1997 he had income of respectively about <damage type = "other">$5,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$13,000</damage> inclusive of social assistance payments.
115  Currently the plaintiff's income is in the range of <damage type = "other">$150,000</damage> per year and although his remuneration far outweighs his historic income from the practice of law, it comes with a price of living in remote areas, and the work sites cannot compare with the comforts of working in an urban office setting, doing work you enjoy. He had worked hard to earn the right to become a professional person.
LIMITATION DEFENCES
116  Counsel for the defendant Patry argues that the Information charging the plaintiff with two counts of harassment was sworn September 30, 1995. The defendant Patry had met with Constable Weiss mid-afternoon of September 25, 1995, and in his report to Crown counsel September 28, 1995 he refers to some statements attributed to her.
117  Counsel notes that this proceeding alleging malicious prosecution was commenced September 26, 1997, and is more than two years after the defendant Patry had spoken with Constable Weiss, and therefore beyond the two years of the plaintiff's right to bring such action pursuant to s. 3(3)(e) of the Limitation Act. The question is posed as whether the applicable time for bringing action was the date the defendant Patry contributed information ultimately written into the Report to Crown Counsel or when the plaintiff was arrested on September 30, 1995.
118  Counsel seeks to draw an analogy to an action for defamation, which, if actionable per se, must, pursuant to the Limitation Act, be brought within two years of publication [Gatley on Libel and Slander, 7th Edition, post 831]. It is argued that it is the defendant Patry's involvement with Constable Weiss that is the core of the assertion of malicious prosecution, and therefore it is the date of that event which is the commencement of the limitation at issue.
119  Time in the case of malicious prosecution cannot run, however, until the cause of action is completed by the proceedings having been terminated in the plaintiff's favour, which did not occur until October 1995. The suggestion that a stay is not a resolution of the proceeding would lead to an even wider period of limitation to the time when the two year limitation on bringing a charge would occur. There would also be no damages sustained by the plaintiff as a result of the impugned conduct of the defendant Patry until a charge occurred. The time running between a statement to police and the action upon it in laying a charge cannot, when the plaintiff has no knowledge of the occurrence, impinge upon the two year limitation period.
120  I find that the action for malicious prosecution was commenced within the two year limitation period in respect of malicious prosecution.
121  Counsel for the defendant Patry attacks the addition of causes of action for negligence, intentional infliction of mental suffering, and abuse of process, which were added to the action by amendment beyond the expiry of the time limitations applicable. It is argued that negligence was first added in paragraph 12 of an Amended Statement of Claim filed September 21, 1998 and is therefore out of time as beyond the two year limitation of s. 3(2)(a) of the Limitation Act.
122  It appears that the claim for negligence is one for other than injury to the person or property, and would therefore be governed by a six year limitation. The damages alleged in respect of the defendant Patry began on September 30, 1995, and negligence has been alleged, if not in the original pleading, has since the September 21, 1998 amendment, which is within the six year limitation regarding negligence and abuse of process. Counsel for the plaintiff argues that later amendments do not change those claims but only provide more detail.
123  Counsel could not advise the court of the dates when various amendments were requested, when agreements were made to permit amendments, and how long it took before amendments were prepared and amended pleadings filed. The amended pleadings, as of the date of trial, had survived three applications by the defendants to strike pleadings.
124  The amendments that occurred to add causes of action in respect of negligence, intentional infliction of mental suffering, and abuse of process come within the ambit of s. 4(4) of the Limitation Act, which permits an addition of a cause of action "... even if between the issue of the writ and the application for amendment a fresh cause of action disclosed by the amendment would have become barred by the lapse of time".
125  An amendment made out of time is to be considered, but is not a bar even if the amendment would defeat a limitation defence a defendant wished to raise [Romanchuk v. Revelstoke (City),  (S.C.); Abdel-Magid v. Simon Fraser University, ].
126  I find the causes of action for negligence, abuse of process, and intentional infliction of mental suffering are not barred by limitation. The pleadings may be inelegant and developed patchwork through amendment, but are adequate in support of the facts plead.
THE LAW
Malicious Prosecution
127  The leading Canadian authority on the tort of malicious prosecution is Nelles v. Ontario, . The elements necessary to succeed in an action for malicious prosecution are set out at para. 42:
the proceedings must have been initiated by the defendant;
the proceedings must have terminated in favour of the plaintiff;
the absence of reasonable and probable cause;
malice, or a primary purpose other than that of carrying the law into effect.
[See also John G. Fleming, The Law of Torts, 5th ed. (Sydney: Law Book Co., 1977) at p. 598]
128  The Court at para.43 set out the definition of reasonable and probable cause from Hicks v. Faulkner (1881), 8 Q.B.D. 167 at 171, Hawkins J., aff'd 46 L.T. 130 (C.A.):
... an honest belief in the guilt of the accused based upon a full conviction, founded on reasonable grounds, of the existence of a state of circumstances, which, assuming them to be true, would reasonably lead any ordinarily prudent and cautious man, placed in the position of the accuser, to the conclusion that the person charged was probably guilty of the crime imputed ...
129  The test is therefore said to contain both a subjective belief on the part of the prosecutor and that belief must objectively be reasonable in the circumstances.
130  In regard to the requirement for malice, the Court in Nelles, supra at para. 45 noted that:
The required element of malice is for all intents, the equivalent of "improper purpose". It has according to Fleming, a "wider meaning than spite, ill-will or a spirit of vengeance, and includes any other improper purpose, such as to gain a private collateral advantage" (Fleming, op. cit., at p. 609).
131  In Petrovich v. Campbell,  (S.C.) (Q.L.), Mr. Justice Sheppard approved of the test for the first element of whether the proceedings were initiated by the defendant as set out in Fleming on the Law of Torts, 7th Ed., p. 582:
To incur liability, the defendant must play an active role in the conduct of the proceedings, as by "instigating" or setting them in motion ... The defendant must have been "actively instrumental" in setting the law in motion. Simply giving a candid account, however incriminating, to the police or magistrate is not the equivalent of launching a prosecution: the critical decision to prosecute not being his, 'the stone set rolling [is] a stone of suspicion only.'
132  If therefore only a candid account of an incident is given by person to the police, the requirement will likely not be met. However, Sheppard J. found it was malicious where, in addition to an account to police, a person is adamant that a charge be laid, gives false information, and withholds information that made the statement to police "slanted" rather than "candid".
133  The rational is, of course, that if slanted or untrue information is provided to the police, the decision to lay a charge by the prosecuting authority is prejudiced.
134  In Reilly v. British Columbia (Attorney General), , provides a detailed review of the definition and elements of malice at para. 20, and in part refers to a succinct statement quoted from Klar (Rainaldi, ed.), Remedies in Tort, loose-leaf (Toronto: Thomson, 1987), Vol. 1, 15-30 to 15-33, where it is stated at 15-30, and found common with the views of other text authors:
Malice in fact must be proved by the plaintiff; this can be done in one of two ways: (i) by showing what the motive was and that it was improper; or (ii) by showing that the circumstances were such that prosecution can only be accounted for by implying some wrong or indirect motive to the prosecutor, although it may be impossible to say what it was. Where an inference of malice is drawn, it should be made from the conduct of the defendant at the time he instituted proceedings.
135  The authorities support the view that without doubt in an appropriate case it is proper to infer malice from the absence of reasonable and probable cause to commence a prosecution.
APPLICATION TO THE DEFENDANTS
136  I find that the elements of the tort of malicious prosecution have been met. The defendants clearly initiated the process leading to the plaintiffs being charged when they attended upon the police, filed their statements, and wanted the plaintiff charged.
137  There is no evidence that the police were acting on any complaints other than those of the defendants. The conduct and actions of the defendants must be viewed on the basis of their statements and actions in seeking to have the plaintiff charged, not simply on the truncated version later distilled in Report of Crown Counsel.
138  Their statements were far from a candid account and contained untrue and inflammatory accusations. Statements were slanted to allege urgency and danger. They falsely conveyed the impression lives were in danger. The defendants importuned several Crown counsel to have charges laid and maintained.
139  The Report to Crown counsel was made September 28, 1995 and the warrant and arrest of the plaintiff occured September 30, 1995. There is nothing to suggest any basis other than the actions of the defendants were the cause for charges.
140  The defendants were outraged when told charges were to be stayed. They were abusive of Crown counsel, threatened going to superiors and the media, and demanded in some manner to appeal the stay decisions.
141  I am satisfied that the proceeding leading to the charge and arrest of the plaintiff on the charges of harassment were instigated by the defendants.
142  The charge in respect of each defendant was stayed, and as previously noted was vehemently protested by both of them. I am satisfied the stay was clearly a termination of the proceeding in the plaintiffs favour.
143  I find that there is no evidence to support reasonable and probable cause. The defendant Patry's claims of fear and danger were without foundation. She had no involvement with the accused giving rise to reason to be in fear, nor have any concern for her physical safety. He had not been in her physical presence since the arbitration and had not spoken with her. That her application to the Supreme Court for a restraining order had been dismissed was a matter which she also withheld from the police.
144  The plaintiff had been reported to have referred to her as a "bitch" during the time of the Judicial Review, and it had been reported to her that he had said he would sue her and take her car and house. It was clear to her those comments were spoken in response to her personal attack upon him in the in the Judicial Review, and were never in the context of any threat of physical violence or criminal action.
145  The plaintiff used her status as a medical doctor to falsely brand the plaintiff as a mentally dangerous person. This was highly reprehensible conduct on her part. The defendant Patry's allegations of danger and threats to her mother and children were completely groundless and deliberately misleading.
146  The short time from charge to the stay of the charges is also indicative that no real and probable cause existed to support the allegations being made.
147  I agree with the comment of counsel that the defendant Anderson was clearly a troubled woman, with an apparently deeply seated desire to blame many of her problems on the plaintiff for failing to support and marry her. I regret that I must approach her evidence with extreme caution given the many instances where it has been contradicted by others and inconsistent with her own evidence on other occasions.
148  In the Judicial Review proceeding, she filed three contradictory affidavits. She has demonstrated a disturbing pattern of taking actions or statements out of context and giving them unwarranted sinister application. She demonstrated a significant memory deficit during the course of her evidence which at times makes it difficult to understand her evidence or weight that can accorded to it.
149  The dozens of letters of the defendant Anderson in evidence that I have reviewed indicate that the plaintiff in September 1995 when speaking with the police was in one of the "hate" portions of the "love-hate cycle" regarding how she viewed her relationship with the plaintiff.
150  I do not accept that the telephone messages the plaintiff left when he was attempting to contact her, or the day he waited outside her apartment for her to return home, were in any sense harassment. I do not accept that the defendant Anderson had any real fear of the defendant, nor on the evidence was there any reason for her to fear him. I am sure however, because of her conduct, she did not wish to see him at that particular time. That was because the defendant Anderson had once more sworn an affidavit (the third) in the Judicial Review proceeding resiling from the second affidavit filed to correct the first affidavit, and was avoiding the defendant as she knew he would be upset, given what he had gone through to obtain her second affidavit, which was prepared to correct her first affidavit.
151  Finally, in my view there was clearly malice on the part of both defendants and a primary purpose other than that of carrying the law into effect. The defendant Anderson was motivated by her anger at the plaintiff's failure to marry and support her, and her perception that he was in some manner to blame for ruining her life. She wanted revenge by having him punished. That was her motive in contacting the defendant Patry, providing affidavits for her use in the Judicial Review proceeding, making of complaints to the Law Society, and finally in seeking to have him charged by the police.
152  The defendant Anderson's hate for the plaintiff was palpable during the evidence she gave at trial. I have no doubt the defendant Patry was the one who was instrumental in having the defendant Anderson swear affidavits in the Judicial Review proceeding, register complaints with the Law Society and to seek criminal charges being laid. The defendant Patry immersed the defendant Anderson in the vendetta she was waging against the plaintiff. The defendant Anderson's moods of intense hate for the plaintiff gained new focus following her association with the defendant Patry, and the result was devastating to the plaintiff.
153  The defendant Patry formed an intense dislike of the plaintiff and a desire for revenge for his finding against her in the Arbitration, which grew and expanded beyond her properly seeking redress of a legal wrong into a vendetta to strip him of his job, professional standing, and finally to have him subjected to criminal prosecution.
154  The defendant Patry, during the course of the Arbitration, complained about the plaintiff to the Residential Tenancy Branch personnel. She wanted him removed from her arbitration. Following his decision with an award of <damage type = "other">$1,500</damage> in damages against her, she was furious and wanted him fired, and she importuned his superiors and various government officials to be certain his contract was not renewed.
155  The defendant Patry appealed by way of Judicial Review, which was a proper course for her to follow, however her appeal was almost entirely an attack in one form or another on the plaintiff's character, competence, honesty, and professionalism. The defendant Patry's allegations were unproven in the Judicial Review proceeding. Mr. Justice Melvin found she was accorded a fair hearing and her attack on the plaintiff in the Judicial Review was "ill advised".
156  That attack in Judicial Review, however, was not enough to satisfy her. She sought to have the police charge the plaintiff criminally for tampering, altering or destroying tape recordings of the Arbitration. She complained to the Law Society seeking to affect the plaintiff's professional standing. She began to expand her attack on the plaintiff to brand him as violent and dangerous, diagnose him as a psychopath, and without attempt to verify the accuracy of various untruths she heard, passed on to others "rumours", including that he had been castrated and that he had been terminated with the Credit Union because of unacceptable performance. In the confines of the Judicial Review, there was opportunity for the plaintiff to defend himself against unjustified accusations, however out its confines he was the more vulnerable.
157  The culmination of her efforts was the attempt to have him charged criminally at a time which coincided with the hearing about to commence before Mr. Justice Melvin.
158  The two defendants each for their separate reasons finally succeeded in bringing down the plaintiff and inflicting serious punishment on him. It was neither threat nor fear that grounded their campaign to have the plaintiff charged criminally; it was hate and the improper purpose of punishing him and gaining advantage in the Judicial Review proceeding.
ABUSE OF PROCESS, NEGLIGENCE, INTENTIONAL INFLICTION OF MENTAL SUFFERING
159  The torts of abuse of process, negligence, and intentional infliction of mental suffering are in large measure duplicitous of the tort of malicious prosecution although there are some distinctions among them. In view of my finding that the tort of malicious prosecution has been made out, I intend to deal with the remaining alleged torts in more summary fashion.
Abuse of Process
160  The tort of abuse of process is more often found in civil than in criminal context. The elements are that:
the defendant must have used the legal process for a purpose other than it was designed to serve, in other words for a collateral or illicit purpose,
the defendant must also have done some definite act or made some definite threat in furtherance of the improper purpose; and
some measure of damages must be shown.
161  In Guilford Industries Ltd. v. Hankinson Management Services Ltd. ,  (BCSC), Mr. Justice Anderson refers at para. 26 to Fleming on Torts to illustrate the essential difference of the tort of abuse of process from the tort of malicious prosecution.
... Quite distinct, however, are cases where a legal process, not itself devoid of foundation, has been perverted to accomplish some extraneous purpose, such as extortion or oppression. Here an action will lie at the suit of the injured party for what has come to be called abuse of process.
...
Unlike malicious prosecution, the gist of this tort lies not in the wrongful procurement of legal process or the wrongful launching of criminal proceedings, but in the misuse of process, no matter how properly obtained, for any purpose other than that which it was designed to serve. (Rest. S 682.) It involves the notion that the proceedings were 'merely a stalking-horse to coerce the defendant in some way entirely outside the ambit of the legal claim upon which the court is asked to adjudicate', (Varawa v. Howard Smith (1911) 13 C.L.R. 35, 91 (Isaacs J.)) and it is therefore immaterial whether the suit thus commenced was founded on reasonable cause or even terminated in favour of the instigator. The improper purpose is the gravamen of liability.
162  There is application here as the defendants misused the criminal law process in furtherance of an escalating personal attack on the plaintiff in the Judicial Review proceeding, which was extraneous to the proper judicial review of the arbitration decision. The defendant Patry sought to gain advantage in the Judicial Review and to punish the plaintiff for what she considered his wrongful conduct as arbitrator. The motivation of the defendant Anderson was her quest to see the plaintiff punished for his failure to support her.
163  The actions of the defendants in providing their statements to police and actively promoting immediate action to be taken were in furtherance of the improper purpose.
Negligence
164  The claim of negligence is raised as an alternative ground for liability in the event of a finding that certain statements or actions of the defendants were not intentional.
165  I have found the relevant actions of the defendants at issue occurred intentionally, that is, with their reasonable certainty as to what the consequences would be, and that those consequences were desired.
166  Specifically, the plaintiff argues that the defendant Patry, a medical doctor, made outrageous and unsupported medical findings as to the plaintiff's psychological make-up which were calculated to discredit him and to encourage the police to charge and arrest him as did occur.
167  I accept the defendant Patry owed the plaintiff a duty of care to avoid making negligent and false accusations of the plaintiff's mental health [Bella v. Young, ]. I also accept she had as a medical doctor a standard of care to the plaintiff higher than a lay person would have [Davidson v. British Columbia  (S.C.)].
168  I have concern however, given the absence of evidence from the persons involved in the charge process, of the singular effect or impact of the defendant Patry's medical opinions, and therefore whether a sufficient causal connection has been shown to the laying of the charge and consequent arrest. I do not, therefore, find liability based on the tort of negligence.
Intentional Infliction of Mental Suffering
169  The elements of the tort of intentional infliction of mental suffering are:
outrageous or flagrant conduct,
an intention to cause some harm of the kind produced
actual harm
[Rahemtulla v. Vanfed Credit Union  (S.C.)].
170  The defendant Patry's conduct in making allegations in her pursuit of the plaintiff personally far beyond the ambit of the judicial review of the arbitration decision, by employing false statements and inaccurate information, can be fairly characterized as flagrant and extreme, particularly when focused on allegations of criminal conduct and enforcing criminal law.
171  The conduct of the defendants in pursuing the continuation of the charges after they were stayed speaks volumes evidencing that they intended charges and arrest of the plaintiff, and were not just seeking some form of a restraining order. That had earlier been sought and denied in the Supreme Court.
172  The defendants were at least intending that the plaintiff be arrested, that he would be humiliated, and that his defence of the judicial review allegations would be impacted. Although they did not intend the prolonged and serious effects that the plaintiff alleges, it is sufficient for the cause of action to be made out.
DAMAGES
173  The plaintiff's life was severely affected by the charges and arrest occasioned by the defendants' unfounded and malicious actions. The plaintiff experienced depression which manifested itself in several forms including suicide ideation, grossly excessive weight gain, and an inability to focus and concentrate adequately to carry on his law practice.
174  The inability of the plaintiff to continue his law practice led to difficulties with the Law Society and closing his office as of December 31, 1995. He was without money to meet the payments on his residence and he lived for a time in his office. He downsized his office and when that closed he lived for a period of time in his car and was forced to accept welfare.
175  His depression fuelled downward spiral was somewhat similar to the earlier period in his life when his employment with the West Coast Savings Credit Union ended and he was unable to find a new job. The plaintiff had historically suffered with some depression prior to the incident of his arrest on September 30, 1995 but it had been substantially controlled through medication in 1989.
176  The plaintiff was befriended by Ms. Parr in the spring of 1996 with whom he then lived and she helped him to regain some stability in his life. He also was treated by Dr. Johnson for his depression and was able to make dozens of applications in a serious effort to obtain employment.
177  The plaintiff finally succeeded in obtaining employment in October 1999 on a temporary basis as a Regional Estates Specialist with Indian and Northern Affairs Canada. The plaintiff found he could not manage the stress from his work very well, and had episodic "crying jags" during meetings.
178  The plaintiff realized he needed to change his occupation as he was unable to function as a lawyer and in 1999 he moved to Alberta and began work as a pipe-fitter and high-rigger. The work is physically strenuous, work sites are remote, weather conditions adverse and living conditions poor. The work, however, is very remunerative and presently the plaintiff earns in the <damage type = "other">$150,000</damage> range annually, which is several times more than his highest years earnings as a lawyer.
179  Although I accept the defendants' actions caused severe depression which created a downward spiral in the plaintiff's life, I am not, on the evidence, persuaded that his private law practice would otherwise have prospered and been financially successful.
180  The plaintiff's employment history has centered more on employment as house counsel rather than private practice. The plaintiff had left his employment with an Indian Band in Merritt in mid 1994 with a lawsuit against his employer remaining extant. He moved to Duncan, a small community, to live with his fiancé Ms. Bones. That relationship ended less than amicably in December 1994, and again the plaintiff commenced litigation. He was asked by the law firm he was employed with in Duncan to leave, and the parting was acrimonious.
181  The plaintiff had also, of course, not had his contract as arbitrator renewed by the Residential Tenancy Branch because of complaints about his "demeanour", as well as the complaints of the defendant Patry. He was also having to endure the unpleasant personal attack of the defendant Patry in the Judicial Review proceeding.
182  I am of the view the plaintiff would likely have closed out his law practice in Duncan and again sought in house counsel employment within months regardless of the September 30, 1995 charges and arrest. In seeking employment again as house counsel the plaintiff may very well have experienced the difficult process of having to make many applications over a significant period of time to find a new opportunity.
183  The loss of income aspect of damages for which the defendants are responsible is therefore tempered. The substantially higher income level the plaintiff has enjoyed since 1999 more than off-sets loss the plaintiff has suffered from the early wind up of his law practice and his loss at being unable to remain in the profession for which he was trained, enjoyed, and that he wished to follow.
184  The actions of the defendants were vindictive and they were tenacious and unrelenting in their effort to maintain the charges their actions precipitated. I find no defence of justification or truth has been shown.
185  I assess the plaintiff's entitlement to damages against the defendants jointly and severally in the amount of <damage type = "general">$50,000</damage>.
PUNITIVE DAMAGES
186  The plaintiff seeks punitive damages from the defendants, particularly the defendant Patry. The factors for consideration of punitive damages are succinctly summarized by Mr. Justice Binnie in Whiten v. Pilot Insurance Co., ,  at para. 94.
187  Punitive damages may be given when there is misconduct that would otherwise be unpunished or where other penalties are likely to be inadequate to achieve the objectives of retribution, deterrence and denunciation. Punitive damages should be awarded only where compensatory damages, which are in some degree punitive, would not accomplish these objectives.
188  I conclude that an award of punitive damages is appropriate in the case of the defendant Patry to meet the requirement framed by Mr. Justice Binnie as "... (7) to give a defendant his or her just desert (retribution), to deter the defendant and others from similar misconduct in the future (deterrence), and to mark the community's collective condemnation (denunciation) of what has happened".
189  The evidence shows the defendant Patry escalated a complaint of bias against the plaintiff as arbitrator to ultimately having him arrested on a criminal charge as a "stalker", with innuendo from his alleged castration that he was a sex offender, and he was vilified by her, as a medical doctor, in diagnosing him as "... between a diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia or paranoid, obsessive-compulsive personality disorder ..." and that in her view (again as a medical doctor) "...he was incompetent as a lawyer; he is manipulative, impulsive, prejudicial and he is psychiatrically unstable". These accusations were untrue and without any appropriate basis for her to be giving medical opinion.
190  I award punitive damages of <damage type = "punitive">$10,000</damage> against the defendant Patry.
191  I consider the defendant Anderson's unfortunate background, continuing mental disability, and her tendency to be easily influenced by others, militates against any need for an award of punitive damages.
CONCLUSION
192  The defendants are jointly and severally liable to the plaintiff for damages of <damage type = "general">$50,000</damage>. The defendant Patry is additionally liable for <damage type = "punitive">$10,000</damage> punitive damages.
193  The plaintiff is entitled to the costs of his action.
R.R. HOLMES J.
End of Document
Hardychuk v. Johnstone, [2012] B.C.J. No. 1909
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
New Westminster, British Columbia
G. Dickson J.
Heard: August 8-12, 15-19 and December 12, 2011.
Judgment: September 14, 2012.
Docket: M105520
Registry: New Westminster
[2012] B.C.J. No. 1909   |   2012 BCSC 1359
Between Riechelle Christine Hardychuk, Plaintiff, and Rosanne Johnstone, Nissan Canada Inc., also known as Nissan Canada Inc., James Elliott McFarlane and Karen Geraldine McFarlane, Defendants
(225 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Body injuries — Back and spine — Neck — Soft tissue — Head injuries — Brain damage — Headaches — Psychological injuries — Depression — Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) — Considerations impacting on award — Degree of impairment — Permanent total or partial disability — Credibility — Action by plaintiff for damages from motor vehicle accident — Plaintiff suffered headaches, soft tissue injuries to neck and back, mild traumatic brain injury and post-traumatic stress — Plaintiff's evidence lacked credibility — Non-pecuniary damages of $60,000 for pain and suffering and loss of enjoyment of recreational activities — No award for loss of housekeeping capacity — Past loss of income and earnings capacity assessed at $20,000 — Loss of future earning capacity valued at $75,000 — Cost of future care for counselling, massage, physiotherapy, pain medication and gym valued at $10,000 — Claim for special damages dismissed.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — Categories of — Loss of enjoyment of life — Loss of income — For personal injuries — Calculation — Contingencies — Considerations — Duration of loss — Extent of incapacity — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Loss of housekeeping ability — Retroactive loss of income — Special damage — Non-pecuniary loss — Pain and suffering — Affecting recreational activities — Action by plaintiff for damages from motor vehicle accident — Plaintiff suffered headaches, soft tissue injuries to neck and back, mild traumatic brain injury and post-traumatic stress — Plaintiff's evidence lacked credibility — Non-pecuniary damages of <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$60,000</damage> for pain and suffering and loss of enjoyment of recreational activities — No award for loss of housekeeping capacity — Past loss of income and earnings capacity assessed at <damage type = "past wage loss">$20,000</damage> — Loss of future earning capacity valued at <damage type = "future wage loss">$75,000</damage> — Cost of future care for counselling, massage, physiotherapy, pain medication and gym valued at <damage type = "future care">$10,000</damage> — Claim for special damages dismissed.
Action by the plaintiff for damages resulting from a motor vehicle accident. The defendant admitted liability but contested the extent of the plaintiff's injuries and the amount of damages claimed. The accident occurred in May 2006. The plaintiff was a passenger in a vehicle that was struck on the side by the defendant's vehicle. She suffered head, neck and back pain following the accident. The plaintiff claimed that she suffered serious and permanent injuries from the accident including chronic pain in her neck, shoulders and back, headaches, cognitive deficits, and psychological dysfunction. She also claimed to suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder and a mild traumatic brain injury. The plaintiff was in another motor vehicle accident in June 2011 which aggravated her symptoms from the 2006 accident and caused some regression. 

HELD: Action allowed in part.
 The plaintiff's evidence was vague and contradictory at times, but not deliberately untruthful. Her evidence was approached with some caution, but not discounted entirely. The plaintiff's evidence of her physical, mental and emotional condition was exaggerated. She did suffer from soft tissue injuries to the neck, shoulders and back which reached a plateau within two years of accident. She had unresolved back discomfort, occasional flaring pain and periodic headaches. This had not prevented the plaintiff from resuming vocational or other activities and did not cause a mood disorder or interfere with her cognitive abilities. While the accident did cause post-traumatic stress disorder and a mild traumatic brain injury, these were resolved shortly after the accident. The plaintiff was very athletic and physically active and the injuries, while not severe, had a particular impact on her. She was awarded <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$60,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages to compensate for pain and suffering and loss of enjoyment of recreational activities. There was some limited loss of housekeeping capacity, but this was subsumed in the non-pecuniary award. Past loss of income and earnings capacity was assessed at <damage type = "past wage loss">$20,000</damage>. There was a real but relatively low possibility that the plaintiff's accident-related symptoms would be permanent which resulted in loss of future earning capacity being valued at <damage type = "future wage loss">$75,000</damage>. Cost of future care for counselling, massage, physiotherapy, pain medication and gym was valued at <damage type = "future care">$10,000</damage>. The evidence for the plaintiff's special damages claim was vague and unreliable and no award was made.
Counsel
Counsel for Plaintiff: T. Spraggs, J. Dhahan.
Counsel for Defendants: J. Lindsay, Q.C., D. Jeffrey.
Reasons for Judgment
G. DICKSON J.
INTRODUCTION
1  The plaintiff, Riechelle Hardychuk, claims damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident on May 20, 2006. The defendants admit liability but dispute the nature and extent of Ms. Hardychuk's alleged injuries and the amount of damages claimed.
2  Ms. Hardychuk was a 20-year-old apprentice cabinetmaker employed at a high-end custom woodworking business at the time of the accident. Prior to its occurrence she was in generally good health and led an active, busy lifestyle. Throughout most of her life Ms. Hardychuk functioned well and enjoyed close relationships with family and friends, although in her late teens she suffered a period of depression. She enjoyed school, excelled in many sports and looked forward to a career in cabinetmaking or construction with optimism and pleasure.
3  Ms. Hardychuk contends that, as a result of the accident, she suffered soft tissue injuries to her neck, shoulders and upper back and a mild traumatic brain injury. Thereafter, she says she developed chronic pain in her neck and back, headaches, anxiety and cognitive deficits such as difficulty with memory and concentration. In consequence, although she continued her employment as a cabinetmaker for four years post-accident, Ms. Hardychuk says that by October, 2010 she had to stop work due to the effects of her injuries. She has been unemployed since and says she is permanently partially disabled vocationally, recreationally, and interpersonally. She claims substantial damages for pain and suffering, past and future loss of housekeeping capacity, past and future loss of capacity to earn income, cost of future care and special damages.
4  The defendants accept that Ms. Hardychuk suffered soft tissue injuries to her neck and back and a concussion in the accident. They contend, however, that she has seriously exaggerated the extent of her injuries and their effect on her life and future prospects. In particular, the defendants deny that Ms. Hardychuk is physically, mentally or emotionally unable to work as a cabinetmaker as a result of her injuries or that her personal life has deteriorated to nearly the extent she alleges. In so far as her condition continues to be affected negatively by her injuries, they say it should improve with further time and treatment. In sum, they submit Ms. Hardychuk is entitled to a moderate award for non-pecuniary damages and modest, if any, awards under the other heads of damages claimed.
ISSUES
5  The issues for determination are:
What was Ms. Hardychuk's condition before and after the accident, and why?
What is Ms. Hardychuk's future prognosis?
What quantum of damages should be awarded to Ms. Hardychuk?
FACTS
Preliminary Comment on Credibility and Reliability
6  The credibility and reliability of Ms. Hardychuk's account of her condition before and after the accident are key issues for determination. They are also hotly contested by the parties.
7  According to her counsel, Ms. Hardychuk was a sincere witness who described significant post-accident changes in her physical, mental and emotional health and functioning in a believable manner that was supported by the testimony of knowledgeable others. According to defence counsel, much of Ms. Hardychuk's testimony was inconsistent with her prior statements, common sense and the testimony of disinterested third parties. In addition, her subjective complaints of pain are unsupported by objective evidence. In the result, defence counsel says Ms. Hardychuk's account is not credible or reliable and it should not be believed.
8  The factors to be considered when assessing credibility were summarized by Dillon J. in Bradshaw v. Stenner, , as follows:
186 Credibility involves an assessment of the trustworthiness of a witness' testimony based upon the veracity or sincerity of a witness and the accuracy of the evidence that the witness provides (Raymond v. Bosanquet (Township) ,  (S.C.C.)). The art of assessment involves examination of various factors such as the ability and opportunity to observe events, the firmness of his memory, the ability to resist the influence of interest to modify his recollection, whether the witness' evidence harmonizes with independent evidence that has been accepted, whether the witness changes his testimony during direct and cross-examination, whether the witness' testimony seems unreasonable, impossible, or unlikely, whether a witness has a motive to lie, and the demeanour of a witness generally (Wallace v. Davis  (Ont. H.C.); Faryna v. Chorny,  (B.C.C.A.) [Faryna]; R. v. S.(R.D.),  at para. 128 (S.C.C.)). Ultimately, the validity of the evidence depends on whether the evidence is consistent with the probabilities affecting the case as a whole and shown to be in existence at the time (Faryna at para. 356).
9  Where, as here, a plaintiff's case relies on subjective symptoms with little or no objective evidence of continuing injury the court must be exceedingly careful in examining the evidence and assessing credibility: Price v. Kostryba . If deliberate falsehood is established it may be difficult to disentangle truth from deceit and some truthful aspects of the plaintiff's testimony may lose their force, particularly in the absence of corroboration. That being said, when a plaintiff is accused of deliberate deceit more than speculation or innuendo is required. A charge of deliberate deceit under oath is a serious attack on an individual's integrity which should not be lightly treated or lightly made: Halteren v. Wilhelm, ; Edmondson v. Payer, ; Vasiliopoulos v. Dosangh, .
10  The typical starting point in a credibility assessment is to presume truthfulness: Halteren. Truthfulness and reliability are not, however, necessarily the same. A witness may sincerely attempt to be truthful but lack the perceptive, recall or narrative capacity to provide reliable testimony. Alternatively, he or she may unconsciously indulge in the human tendency to reconstruct and distort history in a manner that favours a desired outcome. There is, of course, also the possibility that a witness may choose, consciously and deliberately, to lie out of perceived self-interest or for some other reason. Accordingly, when a witness's evidence is demonstrably inaccurate the challenge from an assessment perspective is to identify the likely reason for the inaccuracy in a cautious, balanced and contextually sensitive way.
11  The presumption of truthfulness will be displaced by convincing evidence of deliberate falsehood. Such evidence may take many forms. There is no hard and fast rule as to how falsehood on a plaintiff's part may be demonstrated in a personal injury action. In my view, however, in most such cases fairness will require that a plaintiff be given an opportunity to respond directly to an assertion of deliberate untruthfulness before his or her credibility, as distinct from reliability, is successfully impeached: R. v. Lyttle, ; Browne v. Dunn (1893), 6 R. 67 (U.K.H.L.).
12  If Ms. Hardychuk's account of her pre and post-accident condition is not convincing then the hypothesis upon which the expert opinions rest will be undermined: Samuel v. Chrysler Credit Canada Ltd., . In consequence, the opinions proffered will have little, if any, evidentiary value. To varying extents, all of the experts who assessed Ms. Hardychuk relied on her to describe or demonstrate her history and condition in a truthful and reliable manner. If she failed to do so, the resulting opinion lacks foundation and is thus not entitled to weight.
13  In this case I have found assessment of Ms. Hardychuk's credibility and reliability to be unusually challenging. As her counsel points out, it is inherently unlikely that she would consciously and deliberately mislead expert assessors or the court on matters she must know could be easily recognised and contradicted. It is also unlikely she would attend upon multiple health care practitioners or quit her job in an effort to build up a personal injury claim. On the other hand, as defence counsel points out Ms. Hardychuk's complaints of pain and disability have improbably increased recently rather than stayed at a plateau or improved and seem inconsistent with much of her earlier post-accident performance. In addition, she has said different things to different people at different times about how she feels and what she can do. She has also showed questionable effort on recent tests administered by experts to measure her mental and physical capacities.
14  As discussed below, I conclude that Ms. Hardychuk's account of her pre and post-accident history and condition is in some respects unreliable. When testifying her memory was often extraordinarily poor, her evidence vague and her prior statements occasionally inconsistent on non-trivial matters. For example, the cause of Ms. Hardychuk's depressed mood is a significant issue for determination. She testified, however, that she did not recall taking medication for depression in 2003, although clinical records reveal that she did and she previously reported having done so to Dr. Schmidt, a neuropsychologist. She was also unable to recall other aspects of her health history and claimed to suffer a current level of disability at odds with her post-accident academic, vocational and recreational activities, as well as with objective testing.
15  In addition, Ms. Hardychuk's demeanour in the witness stand was occasionally argumentative and seemingly directed at making the case rather than responding to questions. For example, when defence counsel asked her to confirm her high marks at B.C.I.T., earned post-accident, she replied at considerable length about how some courses were "incredibly easy" and how frustrating it had been for her to absorb new information. She also volunteered that she probably did well because of her practical experience and familiarity with the materials and equipment.
16  Further, Ms. Hardychuk repeatedly squirmed and changed position when she was testifying in the witness stand. Sometimes she crouched on her knees to alleviate neck and back discomfort associated with prolonged sitting. Although I accept that, as she stated, Ms. Hardychuk found it uncomfortable to sit and testify, her frequent movements had an extreme and rather theatrical quality not apparent when she sat for prolonged periods in other contexts such as lengthy meetings with experts. They detracted from her overall credibility, although only in a minor way.
17  Despite the weaknesses in her testimony and presentation, however, I am not persuaded that Ms. Hardychuk was deliberately untruthful. This proposition was not put to her directly, nor do I think it justified on the evidence. On the contrary, at least for the most part I conclude Ms. Hardychuk has convinced herself that her physical, mental and emotional condition are in the dire state she described and attempted to demonstrate throughout the course of her testimony. Although I do not accept her description as entirely accurate, I find that she has exaggerated in a largely unconscious or, at worst, semi-conscious way. She has also retrospectively over-attributed some of her difficulties to the effects of the accident.
18  All things considered, I approach Ms. Hardychuk's evidence with considerable caution. I do not, however, necessarily discount it, even where uncorroborated, in making the factual findings set out below.
Before the Accident
19  Ms. Hardychuk was born on March 26, 1986. She grew up in North Delta, British Columbia in a close and supportive family. Her father is a fire fighter. Her mother works at Pacific Blue Cross. She has one older brother.
20  Ms. Hardychuk graduated with a grade 12 diploma from North Delta Senior Secondary School in 2004. She was a reasonably good student, although her interests and aptitudes were primarily practical rather than academic in orientation. She was also an excellent athlete who played several sports at a competitive level, including soccer and "Rep A" fast pitch baseball. Recreationally, she engaged in activities such as rollerblading, kickboxing and snowboarding. As she stated in her testimony, sports were, for Ms. Hardychuk, "a part of me, who I was".
21  In addition to the physical benefits of sports, Ms. Hardychuk thoroughly enjoyed the social aspects. Her friends were similarly sport-oriented and they spent much of their time together engaged in sporting activities.
22  Despite her generally good physical health, Ms. Hardychuk experienced a period of depression in 2003 at the age of seventeen. Unfortunately, the precise nature and extent of that experience are difficult to discern on the evidence presented at trial. Ms. Hardychuk testified only to a vague recollection of feeling depressed about a boyfriend and family conflict and denied any recollection whatsoever of having taken antidepressant medication. In contrast, she said she recalled that her mood was negatively impacted by acne medication.
23  Ms. Hardychuk's father, Shawn Hardychuk, and a close high school friend, Joanna Vulcano, were also vague in their recollections regarding her early experience with depression. Her mother and family physician at the time, Dr. Shokeir, did not testify. Dr. Shokeir has since moved to another province and produced her clinical records. Accordingly, I do not draw a negative inference with respect to her non-attendance as a witness.
24  It is less clear why Ms. Hardychuk's mother, Kim Beavan, did not testify, and somewhat troubling. This is particularly so given that Ms. Beavan provided a collateral interview upon which Dr. Schmidt relied in formulating his opinion regarding Ms. Hardychuk's psychological condition. The absence of that aspect of the foundation upon which Dr. Schmidt's opinion is based reduces its evidentiary value. I decline, however, to infer that Ms. Beavan would likely have given unhelpful evidence with respect to Ms. Hardychuk's depressive episode in 2003.
25  I am able to find some facts based on Ms. Hardychuk's vague recollections, her statements to Dr. Schmidt and Dr. Shokeir's clinical records. Dr. Shokeir's records were admitted on the basis outlined by Metzger J. in Seaman v. Crook, , as proof of the fact that the doctor made the recorded observations, prescribed the recorded treatments and the patient made the recorded statements.
26  When Ms. Hardychuk met with Dr. Shokeir in 2003 she was sometimes accompanied by her mother. Unless it is apparent on the face of the records that it was Ms. Hardychuk and not her mother who made a particular recorded statement, I consider such recordings to be potentially inadmissible hearsay and do not take them into account in making my factual findings.
27  In January, 2003 Dr. Shokeir treated Ms. Hardychuk for acne and prescribed a drug known as Acutane. Ms. Hardychuk found that the Acutane made her feel depressed. As a result, she stopped taking it.
28  In May, 2003 Dr. Shokeir saw Ms. Hardychuk in connection with depressed mood and prescribed Celexa, an antidepressant. I am unable to identify the underlying reason(s) for Ms. Hardychuk's depression, although I accept that, as she testified, relationship distress was a contributing factor. There may have been others. Regardless of the cause(s), however, it is plain that Ms. Hardychuk was treated for depression for several months with Celexa. It is also plain that her mood eventually improved in response.
29  As of October, 2003, Ms. Hardychuk was still reporting symptoms such as sadness, irritability, anxiety, crying and angry outbursts. By December, 2003, she stopped taking the antidepressant medication for unexplained reasons I cannot identify.
30  Early in her high school career Ms. Hardychuk took a course in woodworking, which she enjoyed thoroughly. Thereafter, she also took courses such as framing and carpentry. In Grade 12, she participated in a house building project and a practicum program at a cabinetmaking company in Langley. That company, Doug Harris Contracting, offered her an apprenticeship following her graduation from high school.
31  Ms. Hardychuk loved cabinet making, had a knack for it and wished to pursue the trade as a long-term career option. She enjoyed producing "cool things", was careful and detail-oriented, and responded naturally to working with wood. In these circumstances, she sensibly decided to enroll in the cabinetmaking apprenticeship program at B.C.I.T. and accepted the job offer from Doug Harris Contracting.
32  The B.C.I.T. program takes four years to complete and involves both course work and practical experience. The course work is spread over the entire four-year program and separated into four six-week blocks.
33  In June, 2004 Ms. Hardychuk was hit by a car while rollerblading. She suffered scrapes and bruises, soft tissue injuries to her back and a possible left rotator cuff injury. In consequence, she missed a week of work and attended for physiotherapy and massage for several months thereafter. She testified, and I accept, that by the time of the May 20, 2006 accident her injuries from the rollerblading accident had largely resolved and she had resumed all of her previous activities. She had also successfully completed the first block of her B.C.I.T. program with impressively high marks.
34  In December, 2005 Ms. Hardychuk moved from Doug Harris to Hycraft Design Custom Woodworks Ltd.: a high-end woodworking business located on Annacis Island. There she continued with her cabinetmaking apprenticeship. She was the only female employee who worked at Hycraft in this capacity. As a result she was sometimes referred to as "girl", which she tolerated.
35  Ms. Hardychuk's job description at Hycraft was a joiner. Her duties included layout, machine work, assembly and installation of items constructed out of plastic, metal and wood. She worked in the assembly area of the plant.
36  The work environment at Hycraft was competitive, upbeat and generally supportive. Ms. Hardychuk was a valued and capable employee who, for the most part, maintained positive relationships with her work colleagues. These included Rod Dixon, a co-worker, Grant Smith, the foreman, and John Schmidt, Hycraft's owner, all of whom testified at trial.
37  Messrs. Dixon and Schmidt were credible, objective, reliable witnesses. They were both familiar with Ms. Hardychuk's job performance before the accident and able to describe it in clear and balanced terms. I accept their descriptions as accurate and rely upon them.
38  In contrast, Mr. Smith appeared to be defensive about his role in Ms. Hardychuk's departure from Hycraft and to allow his dissatisfaction with her immediate pre-departure performance to colour his overall testimony. He also refused to speak with Ms. Hardychuk's counsel prior to trial. This conduct demonstrated partiality to the defence and detracted from his credibility.
39  Nevertheless, it emerged from the evidence of all three Hycraft witnesses that Ms. Hardychuk showed considerable skill and promise as an apprentice cabinetmaker. It also emerged that before the accident she showed no signs of mental or physical limitation or, in particular, back pain at work. Like all Hycraft employees, Ms. Hardychuk sometimes required assistance with heavy lifting but she had ample physical strength and mental ability to fulfill the job requirements without accommodation. She worked hard, progressed well, and earned the respect and confidence of her co-workers and employer.
40  Although she was reasonably healthy in the year preceding the accident, Dr. Shokeir's records reveal that Ms. Hardychuk complained of breathing problems in late 2005 and early 2006. These problems led to concern that she may be suffering from asthma with a possible anxiety component. When testifying at trial, again Ms. Hardychuk did not recall this aspect of her health history. Nevertheless, the clinical records show that shortly before the accident Dr. Shokeir prescribed a puffer for her ongoing coughing complaints.
41  In sum, before the accident Ms. Hardychuk was in generally good physical and emotional health although she had a history of periodic problems in both areas. Nevertheless, she enjoyed a satisfying social and recreational life, was physically and mentally fit and pursuing a career of interest and aptitude. Her long-term goal was to open a veneer shop of her own, and possibly also to renovate and flip houses. She further planned eventually to marry and raise a family. All of these goals were realistic and well within her reach.
The Accident
42  On May 20, 2006 at approximately 2:00 a.m. Ms. Hardychuk was a seat-belted passenger in the right rear seat of a Ford Explorer driven by the defendant, James McFarlane. Mr. McFarlane was driving her and others home after a social evening out. As he proceeded through the intersection of Scott Road and 72nd Avenue his vehicle was "T-boned" by another, which ran a red light and struck the front passenger side of the McFarlane vehicle.
43  When the impact occurred, Ms. Hardychuk heard metal crunching. Her head hit the side window and she experienced a brief altered state of consciousness. Ms. Hardychuk testified, and I accept, that her recollection of what transpired immediately after the impact is foggy and patchy. For example, she recalls a firefighter holding her neck at the accident scene and aspects of the ambulance ride to the hospital. She was, however, disoriented and faded in and out for several hours thereafter.
44  Ms. Hardychuk was able to provide accurate information regarding her history to emergency personnel who attended upon her at the scene of the accident. According to Dr. Cameron, a neurologist whose evidence I accept, this sort of conduct is not inconsistent with a concussive head injury. Ms. Hardychuk was transported by ambulance to Surrey Memorial Hospital. There she was examined and released to the care of her parents with a prescription for pain medication.
45  The McFarlane vehicle was written off.
After the Accident
46  In the accident's immediate aftermath, Ms. Hardychuk suffered a huge lump on her head and a massive headache. Within a few hours of its occurrence, she also began to suffer sharp pain in her neck that travelled down through her shoulder blades and into her back. She felt dizzy, anxious, stiff and sore all over her body. She slept most of the next day and could hardly move for three weeks. Her sleep was often interrupted by pain and nightmares.
47  On May 23, 2006 Ms. Hardychuk attended at Dr. Shokeir's office. She described the accident and its effects, including neck, shoulder and back pain, headaches, dizziness and short-term memory loss. Dr. Shokeir conducted a physical and mental examination. Amongst other things, she noted the range of motion in Ms. Hardychuk's neck was limited to 50% in all directions. She recorded a diagnosis of mild concussion, whiplash and soft tissue injuries, prescribed Naproxen (an anti-inflammatory), and recommended icing the upper back and physiotherapy.
48  Ms. Hardychuk continued to suffer from neck, shoulder and back pain, frequent headaches and cognitive difficulties such as forgetfulness for several months after the accident. She saw Dr. Shokeir repeatedly regarding these complaints and, on August 17, 2006, underwent a CT of her head. The results were normal. She also attended for regular physiotherapy and massage and followed Dr. Shokeir's advice to stay active. She worked out at the gym regularly and gradually returned to her prior sporting activities, including soccer and baseball.
49  As she reported to Dr. Hershler, a physiatrist, by mid-July, 2006 Ms. Hardychuk felt she was about 70% recovered from her injuries. She had a full range of motion in her head, neck, shoulders and back, but continued to experience periodic headaches and neck and back pain and discomfort. Her sleep also continued to suffer; she felt nervous when driving; and she had occasional nightmares.
50  From mid-July 2006 onward, Ms. Hardychuk took muscle relaxants and anti-inflammatories to help deal with the pain and discomfort caused by her injuries. She also attended for massage and physiotherapy, which provided short-term relief.
51  I find that Ms. Hardychuk's own assessment of her 70% recovery by mid-July, 2006, as reported to Dr. Hershler, was generally accurate. I also find that it represented the early stage of a recovery plateau. As discussed below, I am satisfied that Ms. Hardychuk's soft tissue injury symptoms never fully resolved and she continues to experience back discomfort and occasional flares in pain, as well as occasional headaches. I am also satisfied that the persistence of these symptoms has been frustrating, fatiguing and distressing for Ms. Hardychuk.
52  Although her condition improved marginally over the next two years, by mid-2008 Ms. Hardychuk reached a plateau in her recovery. Her levels of pain and disability have not deteriorated significantly thereafter except in so far as they were otherwise caused.
53  Since reaching her plateau Ms. Hardychuk's day-to-day experience of discomfort, pain and limitation has been variable. In her own words, she has "good days and bad days" dependent in part on her activity level. Heavy lifting at work or prolonged participation in sports leaves her sore and stiff and she tires more easily than she did before the accident. Heavy housework can also be difficult. When she is tired, like most people, she has trouble focusing.
54  Despite the foregoing, Ms. Hardychuk was able to resume the vast majority of her former vocational, social and recreational pursuits within a few months of the accident. To do so, however, she required extra help and more frequent breaks. She also experienced discomfort and occasional flaring back pain. As noted, Ms. Hardychuk suffered some memory loss and other cognitive deficit for several months immediately after the accident. I find, however, that those problems fully resolved.
55  In reaching these conclusions I have considered the entire body of evidence, including Ms. Hardychuk's description of her condition and functioning. Some of that evidence is summarised below. In particular, in addition to Ms. Hardychuk's testimony I have considered her satisfactory performance and progress at work from July, 2006 until shortly before her departure from Hycraft, together with her completion of extra side jobs including construction of her own kitchen cabinets. I have also considered her strong academic post-accident achievement at B.C.I.T., her ongoing participation in travel and sports, and her prior statements to various health care providers and assessors.
56  In addition, I have considered the evidence of Ms. Hardychuk's father, Shawn Hardychuk, her roommate, Joanna Vulcano, and her co-worker, Rod Dixon. All three testified that Ms. Hardychuk's activities, mental acuity and comfort level noticeably reduced after the accident, and never fully returned. Although helpful, these witnesses were quite vague in their recollections and, in the case of Ms. Vulcano and Mr. Dixon, spent limited time with Ms. Hardychuk in the year or two immediately following the accident. As a result, they were better able to provide overall impressions rather than detailed accounts of the change they observed.
57  Further, I have considered the evidence of Messrs. Schmidt and Smith that they were unaware of any serious health problems Ms. Hardychuk might be experiencing in connection with performing her work duties. As noted, given his partiality to the defence Mr. Smith's evidence was of limited value. He did, however, confirm that Ms. Hardychuk sometimes appeared to experience back pain when she was at work. On the other hand, Mr. Schmidt's lack of awareness that Ms. Hardychuk was suffering serious physical or mental problems and his disappointment with her decision to leave Hycraft was far more telling.
58  Like Mr. Smith, Mr. Schmidt knew that Ms. Hardychuk occasionally complained of back pain when working. From his perspective, however, she seemed to be doing pretty well most of the time and he learned of a slip in her performance only shortly before she left Hycraft in October, 2010. If long-standing problems of the nature and magnitude Ms. Hardychuk described actually existed at work one would expect her employer to know about them, investigate and take steps to address the situation. The fact that he did not contributes to my view that Ms. Hardychuk has exaggerated and retrospectively over-attributed some of her difficulties to her injuries.
59  Further, to the extent I found it helpful and reliable I have taken into account the expert evidence in making my factual findings. As discussed below, however, its value is limited by my concerns about the reliability of Ms. Hardychuk's reported history and the extent to which the opinions were founded on those reports. In a few instances, it is also limited by her questionable effort on objective testing.
Post-Accident Medical Treatment
60  Dr. Shokeir closed her practice in the late summer of 2006. Thereafter, Ms. Hardychuk became a patient of Dr. Roy Rampersaud. Her first appointment with Dr. Rampersaud was on September 6, 2006. By the time he testified at trial, Ms. Hardychuk had attended upon Dr. Rampersaud 59 times.
61  Dr. Rampersaud was a strikingly fair and balanced witness. He answered the questions put to him carefully and thoughtfully and maintained an objective stance throughout. In the course of testifying he confirmed that 37 of Ms. Hardychuk's 59 visits included complaints associated with the accident, but of those 27 were also for other reasons and 22 did not involve complaints that were accident-related. Her accident-related complaints related primarily to ongoing neck and back pain which would flare from time to time, as well as headaches. Her range of motion and flexibility in the neck and back area were consistently normal.
62  It is clear that Ms. Hardychuk does not hesitate to seek medical or other attention with respect to her health concerns. On the contrary, she is careful to ensure that she obtains assessment, assistance and treatment whenever such concerns might arise. I intend no criticism in noting this tendency. I remark it, however, because it is inconsistent with the suggestion that Ms. Hardychuk soldiered on stoically for four years and then finally gave up work because she could no longer tolerate the pain.
63  Dr. Rampersaud's records reveal that Ms. Hardychuk's accident-related complaints were treated primarily with anti-inflammatory medication and non-prescription analgesics, together with massage, physiotherapy and other forms of complementary treatment. For example, in January, 2007 he records "going to massage and physioTx" and "pain controlled [with] Advil/Tylenol". In January, 2008, he records "concerned re: ongoing back pain; exercising ... try massage tx - chiropractor". Thereafter, Dr. Rampersaud's clinical records include periodic references to massage, physiotherapy and acupuncture, as well as prescriptions for anti-inflammatory medication and muscle relaxants. Ms. Hardychuk testified, and I accept, that she took these treatments and medications on an as-needed basis. She also testified, and I accept, that she stayed active and exercised as recommended by her treatment providers.
64  Ms. Hardychuk further testified that as time passed and her back pain did not resolve she became concerned that she might need to change careers due to her injuries. From August, 2008 onward she occasionally expressed this concern to Dr. Rampersaud, who noted it in his clinical records. All things considered, I accept that Ms. Hardychuk was genuinely concerned about the possible impact of her back pain on her ability to continue working successfully as a cabinetmaker. I also find that she was consistently able to do so with minor modifications despite her concerns.
65  In September, 2009 Ms. Hardychuk had a flare-up of her back pain. Her range of motion was normal on examination, but she was tender over the upper back and paraspinal muscles. In November, 2009 Dr. Rampersaud referred Ms. Hardychuk to Dr. Chu, a physiatrist. For unknown reasons, she did not attend for an appointment until a second referral was made in July, 2010. Thereafter, she began receiving treatment from Dr. Chu, which treatment apparently includes injections Ms. Hardychuk described as helpful but very painful.
66  Dr. Chu did not testify. In these circumstances, I make no findings in connection with the injections he administers except that Ms. Hardychuk receives them and finds they provide pain relief.
67  Dr. Rampersaud also confirmed that Ms. Hardychuk consulted him regarding many health concerns with no connection to the accident. For example, in the year after its occurrence, amongst other things, she had her tonsils removed and was referred to an infectious diseases specialist regarding a spider bite. Between 2006 and 2011 she also suffered several unrelated injuries. For example, in 2008 she sprained her ankle playing soccer, in 2009 she injured her knee in a fall, and in 2011 she suffered shin splints from running on cement.
68  In January, 2009 Ms. Hardychuk complained to Dr. Rampersaud about low mood, lonely feelings and crying spells. She also reported increased stress and said she had consulted with a counsellor. Surprisingly, she did not inform Dr. Rampersaud that in 2003 she had been successfully treated for depression with Celexa. Nevertheless, Dr. Rampersaud prescribed Celexa and by June, 2009 Ms. Hardychuk's mood had improved considerably. Since then, he has also prescribed another antidepressant known as Pristiq and Ativan for anxiety. He recently referred Ms. Hardychuk to see a psychiatrist.
69  On November 16, 2010 Ms. Hardychuk told Dr. Rampersaud she was laid off of work due to her chronic pain. She made similar statements to other experts, including Dr. Cameron, Dr. Powers, and Mr. McNeil.
Post-Accident Social Life
70  Ms. Hardychuk was living at home with her parents when the accident happened. At the time, she had a boyfriend named Jayce whom she had known since high school. That relationship ended three months after the accident. Jayce did not testify. Although in her testimony Ms. Hardychuk attributed the break-up to the accident, I make no findings as to why the relationship came to an end.
71  Ms. Hardychuk gradually returned to most of her previous social and sporting shortly after the accident. These include, amongst others, soccer, baseball, and snowboarding. Since the accident she has worked out regularly at the gym, as recommended by her treatment providers. She has also travelled to the Philippines and the Bahamas with friends.
72  Ms. Hardychuk testified that she feels nervous and anxious when driving since the accident. I accept this assertion, but find such feelings are fleeting and do not affect her driving or other habits in any way.
73  In the spring of 2007 Ms. Hardychuk moved into a house that she purchased with her parents. They planned to renovate and sell it for profit. Ms. Hardychuk built kitchen cabinets, but did not help with other renovations to the extent and at the pace all concerned had expected. As matters unfolded, she continued to live there and they have earned rental income instead of selling the house. In September, 2009 Ms. Vulcano moved in and became Ms. Hardychuk's roommate.
74  On July 17, 2007 Ms. Hardychuk attended for a follow-up visit with Dr. Hershler. She told him that she had recently moved into the new house and was independent in activities of basic living. She also said that heavy tasks affect her more than they did before the accident. In contrast, however, at trial she testified that she cannot do most housework or yard work because of her back pain. She also testified her mother and Ms. Vulcano do almost all such work. Ms. Vulcano testified to similar effect.
75  I am not persuaded that Ms. Hardychuk is able to perform only very limited housework or yard work. Her statement to Dr. Hershler is inconsistent with this claim. In addition, she was able to work as a cabinetmaker for four years after the accident and managed successfully without a roommate for about two years. Further, Ms. Vulcano's evidence on the point was general and included assumptions about what Ms. Hardychuk's mother did in her absence. Ms. Hardychuk's mother did not testify.
76  On the other hand, I accept that Ms. Hardychuk finds heavy housework more difficult that she did before the accident. As a result, she performs the tasks more slowly and sometimes feels stiff and sore afterwards. I also accept that Ms. Hardychuk's mother helps her out from time to time and Ms. Vulcano does rather more than her fair share around the house.
77  Matt Corrin also testified as a witness. He was involved romantically with Ms. Hardychuk from May to October, 2009 and lived in the house for about a month near the end of their relationship. Mr. Corrin was not acquainted with Ms. Hardychuk before the accident, but knew she had been in one at some point. He also knew that she suffered back pain and discomfort, which he thought contributed to relationship problems involving Ms. Hardychuk's temper, energy and activity level. As with Jayce, Ms. Hardychuk attributed the failure of her relationship with Mr. Corrin to the effects of her injuries.
78  Like Ms. Vulcano, Mr. Corrin's recollections of Ms. Hardychuk's condition and conduct were quite general and impressionistic. Based on his testimony, Ms. Vulcano's and that of Ms. Hardychuk I am satisfied Ms. Hardychuk was often irritable and moody. All things considered, however, I make no findings as to the reasons her relationship with Mr. Corrin failed.
Post-Accident Work Life
79  Ms. Hardychuk missed three weeks of work at Hycraft immediately after the accident. When she returned she performed light duties for a few weeks and was frequently assisted by co-workers. For several months thereafter she found it difficult to read and follow plans because of problems with memory and concentration and headaches. She also found it painful to perform the job's physical demands, which frequently caused her neck, shoulder and back pain to flare. As a result, she often felt irritable and tired at work.
80  Ms. Hardychuk testified that she never returned to performing full duties at Hycraft following the accident. She made similar statements to some of the experts. I do not accept this assertion as accurate. It is inconsistent with her statement to Dr. Herschler that she had been performing regular work since late June, 2006. It is also inconsistent with the testimony of Messrs. Dixon, Schmidt and Smith.
81  I find that Ms. Hardychuk returned to performing the full duties of her job within approximately two months of the accident. This is not to say that her work life was entirely unaffected by her injuries from that point on. It was not. After she reached her recovery plateau, she required more assistance with heavy lifting than she did before the accident. She also took more breaks and suffered intermittent flares of back pain when working. This pattern continued throughout the time she was employed at Hycraft.
82  As Mr. Smith testified, all Hycraft employees occasionally assist one another with heavy lifting. As Mr. Dixon testified, however, Ms. Hardychuk's need for assistance with lifting increased after the accident. In addition, her co-workers occasionally gave her back massages when she complained of pain, which she did every few months, and she took more breaks to maintain her stamina. With these modifications, however, Ms. Hardychuk was able to perform her job well, repeatedly received pay raises and progressed in skills and responsibility.
83  Ms. Hardychuk was also able to complete "side jobs" after regular work hours in the years after the accident. Unfortunately, the evidence on this point was decidedly vague. As a result, I am unable to make detailed findings as to what she did and when except to note that one of her side jobs was construction of kitchen cabinets for the house she owns with her parents. Although I accept that she turned down other possible side jobs I cannot make detailed findings as to how many or when.
84  Ms. Hardychuck was further able successfully to complete the remaining three blocks of her B.C.I.T. coursework after the accident and receive her provincial certification. Her course marks were excellent, although she sometimes became sore and tired after prolonged studying. She did not pass the "Red Seal" exam for cross-Canada certification when she recently attempted to do so. Not surprisingly, she felt disappointed and discouraged as a result.
85  The circumstances surrounding Ms. Hardychuk's departure from Hycraft are contentious. Ms. Hardychuk testified that she left due to her ongoing chronic pain and its negative impact upon her job performance. Defence counsel asserts that she chose to leave for unrelated reasons, perhaps involving a loss of interest in the trade.
86  I conclude that Ms. Hardychuk's attitude, performance and productivity at Hycraft began to slip in the late spring of 2010. I do not accept that she lost interest in cabinetmaking except in so far as she generally lost interest in most activities as part of a depressed mood. I accept that her mood was persistently low and depressed from mid-2009 onward, but am not persuaded this was associated with her soft tissue injury symptoms. I also accept that she found work stressful. This was due in large measure to conflict with her foreman, Mr. Smith.
87  Ms. Hardychuk's physical condition did not change significantly in the spring of 2010. On the contrary, the level of back pain and discomfort she experienced remained essentially as the same as they had been since she reached her recovery plateau.
88  Mr. Smith was aware of the slip in Ms. Hardychuk's job performance. He responded negatively, which contributed to the growing tension and animosity between the two. He also confronted Ms. Hardychuk in an inappropriate manner about a personal relationship and openly criticized her to others. Ms. Hardychuk was understandably distressed and angry. In reaction, she went to Mr. Schmidt on October, 2010 and announced the job was not working out for her. In the course of so doing, she also informed him that she believed her productivity had been slipping.
89  Mr. Schmidt accepted Ms. Hardychuk's statements and laid her off, although he was disappointed by her decision to leave Hycraft. Prior to her announcement in October 2010, he was not concerned about Ms. Hardychuk's job performance. She had not previously expressed such concerns, nor had she sought special accommodations for physical or mental problems in performing her work.
90  Between October 2010 and the trial Ms. Hardychuk was unemployed.
June 29, 2011 Accident
91  On June 29, 2011 Ms. Hardychuk was in another motor vehicle accident. She was a passenger in a vehicle travelling on the highway en route to Penticton. Her friend was driving, veered to avoid a deer and lost control. The car flipped and landed in a field.
92  Ms. Hardychuk testified, and I accept, that she was injured in the June 29, 2011 accident. In its immediate aftermath, her existing condition was seriously aggravated and her symptoms of pain and mental compromise regressed to a similar state to that immediately following the accident of May 20, 2006.
93  I am unable to make any detailed findings regarding the precise nature or extent of Ms. Hardychuk's aggravated condition after the June 29, 2011 accident. This is so because of the paucity and generality of the evidence presented regarding her injuries. As I understand it from her testimony they include a possible concussion.
Expert Evidence
Dr. Rampersaud
94  Ms. Hardychuk's family physician, Dr. Rampersaud, provided expert opinion as well as factual evidence. In his opinion, Ms. Hardychuk suffered from a mild concussion, whiplash and soft tissue injuries to her neck and upper back as a result of the accident. He also opined that in the past few years these injuries developed into a widespread chronic pain syndrome with headaches and psychological effects such as decreased memory, labile mood and anxiety.
95  Dr. Rampersaud went on to opine that it is unlikely Ms. Hardychuk's headaches and back pain will fully resolve in the future. In his view, both will likely affect her recreational activities and she will require assistance with heavy and seasonal household and yard work. He further opined that her injuries will likely affect future employment opportunities as constant moderate to heavy physical work will aggravate her symptoms. In consequence, in his view it is likely Ms. Hardychuk will be unable to pursue cabinetmaking and will need job retraining in a less physically demanding job. It is also likely that she will require intermittent physiotherapy and massage to help her cope with flare-ups of back pain.
96  Dr. Rampersaud's opinion rests largely upon Ms. Hardychuk's reported symptoms and functioning, together with his ongoing examinations. The history included her reports to the effect that she had been on light duties at work since the accident and had limited ability to participate in sports.
97  As noted, Dr. Rampersaud did not know that Ms. Hardychuk was treated for depression in 2003. Although he is familiar with the symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder he did not note them in his records or make this diagnosis.
98  In his October 28, 2010 report, Dr. Rampersaud provided helpful general information regarding the likely resolution of soft tissue injuries in most cases. He wrote:
In the majority of people, soft tissue injuries resolve without sequelae in a finite period of time. A review of the medical literature states that 21%-45% of patients with a whiplash type injury will be symptomatic at two years. Another study concluded that "after two years, symptoms did not alter with further passage of time." However, another study did reveal that a small percentage of people did continue to improve after two years (ie., 22% of patients with soft tissue injury of the cervical spine had significant pain at two years, which decreased to 18% at three years and 14% at five years).
Dr. Hershler
99  Dr. Hershler is a physiatrist. He saw Ms. Hardychuk for assessment on July 17, 2006 and July 17, 2007. On both occasions he conducted a physical examination, the results of which were identical. They included findings that: movements of Ms. Hardychuk's lumbar spine were full and normal; head and neck movements were full with respect to range, with palpation eliciting pain in the lower region and the cervical spine and tender points in the upper right trapezius, but otherwise normal; full shoulder movements and neck and shoulder girdle strength was strong; strong handgrips and normal fine motor coordination; normal head and face; normal neurological examination; normal tone, deep tendon reflexes, strength, sensation and coordination; and excellent reflexes in all extremities.
100  Ms. Hardychuk appeared to be anxious when Dr. Hershler assessed her. She complained of ongoing neck, shoulder and back pain and tightness, fatigue, increased moodiness, and difficulty with memory. As noted, in July, 2006 she estimated her recovery level at 70%. In July, 2007 she estimated it at 60%.
101  Based on her reported history and presentation, Dr. Hershler concluded that Ms. Hardychuk sustained musculo-ligamentous injury to her neck with ligament tenderness in the cervical spine and muscle tenderness in the right upper trapezuis. In his view, this is the most likely reason for her persistent neck pain and headaches. He also diagnosed post-traumatic anxiety and post-traumatic concussion resulting in impaired short-term memory, difficulty with immediate recall, and problems with concentration and focus.
102  As of July 17, 2007, Dr. Hershler opined that Ms. Hardychuk's prognosis for recovery was guarded. He thought it unlikely that her symptoms would disappear in the near future and she would likely be symptomatic for a further two years. He recommended that she continue with a regular exercise regimen. He also recommended physiotherapy, massage and psychological counseling for anxiety and stress.
Dr. Cameron
103  Dr. Cameron is a neurologist. He saw Ms. Hardychuk for assessment on August 22, 2006 and April 7, 2011. On both occasions he performed a neurological and a physical examination. In August, 2006 the results of both were entirely normal. For example, on both Ms. Hardychuk showed normal tone, bulk and power in all extremities. In contrast, in April, 2011 although her neurological examination was normal she exhibited decreased range of movement of her neck due to a complaint of pain.
104  Ms. Hardychuk's principle complaints to Dr. Cameron were physical and subjective in nature. In addition to complaints of ongoing neck, shoulder and back pain, she complained of headaches, decreased concentration and memory, irritability and mood swings.
105  Based on her reported history and presentation, Dr. Cameron concluded that Ms. Hardychuk suffered soft tissue injuries and a mild traumatic brain injury or concussion in the accident. For several months thereafter she suffered cognitive problems such as decreased concentration, memory and information processing in part due to residual effects of her mild traumatic brain injury and in part due to pain and discomfort associated with her physical injuries and developing psychological problems. In Dr. Cameron's opinion, however, after the first few months post-accident any cognitive problems Ms. Hardychuk experienced were due to chronic pain and emotional dysfunction rather than the traumatic brain injury. In particular, in his view Ms. Hardychuk is probably not suffering with long-term residual cognitive deficits as a result of her mild traumatic brain injury.
106  In explaining his opinion as to why Ms. Hardychuk continues to report cognitive deficits Dr. Cameron noted that depressive symptoms can develop gradually after an injury. When this happens, the injured person may describe the physical pain as increasing rather than decreasing over time. This occurs because the perception of pain is compounded by the depression and it may become challenging to sort out the degree to which psychological factors are a contributing factor. That being said, on cross-examination Dr. Cameron agreed that Ms. Hardychuk's complaints of musculoskeletal pain five years after the accident "raise questions".
Dr. Schmidt
107  Dr. Schmidt is a neuropsychologist. He saw Ms. Hardychuk for assessment on January 10 and 18, 2007 and August 26, 2010. Following those assessments he wrote a report dated May 11, 2007 and a follow-up report dated September 22, 2010.
108  In conducting his initial assessment Dr. Schmidt reviewed the ambulance crew report of May 20, 2006, Dr. Hershler's report of July 17, 2006, and Dr. Cameron's report of October 11, 2006. He also interviewed Ms. Hardychuk and her mother, Kim Beavan, and performed neuropsychological testing. As he remarked in his May 11, 2007 report, Dr. Schmidt was provided access to only limited records. In particular, he did not review any educational or vocational records. In addition, he did not review any medical records from prior to the accident.
109  In conducting his follow-up assessment in August, 2010, Dr. Schmidt interviewed Ms. Hardychuk again and performed further neuropsychological testing. On this occasion he had access to a greater volume of records. Some of them were placed before the court; others were not. Included in the package he reviewed were Dr. Rampersaud's clinical records from September, 2006 to July, 2010 and a report from Dr. Shokeir. Dr. Shokeir's report was not placed before the court at trial. Her clinical records were apparently not provided to Dr. Schmidt.
110  At the initial assessment Ms. Hardychuk told Dr. Schmidt that she took anti-depressant medication when she was 13 years old, but he had no further information on this aspect of her history. As part of the foundation of his report, he assumed that she had no pre-accident psychological problems. Ms. Hardychuk described the accident and her experience of pain and functional limitation thereafter, including complaints of memory, concentration and attention difficulties. She also described the presence of intrusive nightmares, together with ongoing mood and sleep disruption.
111  In 2007 Dr. Schmidt found no evidence of cognitive impairment or deficit on objective testing. His findings in this regard were substantially the same when he conducted the 2010 reassessment.
112  Following the 2007 assessment, taking into account her reported history, together with cognitive and personality testing, Dr. Schmidt concluded that Ms. Hardychuk suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder and a mild traumatic brain injury as a result of the accident. He noted the presence of some generalized anxiety, but opined that she did not then show a significant mood disorder. Rather, in Dr. Schmidt's view it appeared that Ms. Hardychuk's post-traumatic stress disorder was "well encapsulated" and had not evolved into more widespread emotional disruption.
113  By the August 2010 reassessment Ms. Hardychuk's presentation had noticeably deteriorated. Although her reported post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms had reduced, she continued to complain of poor memory and concentration, as well as intensified pain, anxiety and depression. Dr. Schmidt administered several neuropsychological tests, none of which revealed any cognitive deficits. On one test, however, three of Ms. Hardychuk's scores were below the cut off, which the test manual provides indicates an underestimation of actual abilities owing to poor effort. On two other tests Ms. Hardychuk's results yielded invalid profiles. On a personality test, Ms. Hardychuk's response pattern was consistent with possible exaggeration.
114  Dr. Schmidt opined that, as of August, 2010, Ms. Hardychuk's difficulties with cognitive functioning were a manifestation of the effects of pain, anxiety and reduced frustration tolerance. He also opined that her low mood likely explained the test results on which she appeared to make a poor effort. He went on to say that since 2007 Ms. Hardychuk's acute symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder had improved, but her general emotional state had deteriorated, with higher levels of depression, anxiety and rumination. He stated further that Ms. Hardychuk's perceptions and coping mechanisms are not optimal and could interfere with her ability effectively to deal with her ongoing pain. He strongly recommended psychological intervention.
115  Dr. Schmidt went on to describe Ms. Hardychuk's prognosis as guarded. In his view, her prospects for improvement are largely dependent on whether she receives and benefits from further treatment interventions in the future.
Dr. Powers
116  Dr. Powers is a vocational rehabilitation consultant. He saw Ms. Hardychuk for assessment on April 26, 2011 and prepared a report dated April 30, 2011 on his findings and opinion.
117  In conducting his assessment Dr. Powers interviewed Ms. Hardychuk and, with an assistant, administered vocational testing. Paragraphs 27 and 28 of the April 30, 2011 report include observations of Ms. Hardychuk made by his assistant, Ms. Eyrl. Ms. Eyrl did not testify. Accordingly, I have disregarded those portions of the report as they constitute inadmissible hearsay.
118  In addition to interviewing Ms. Hardychuk and conducting testing, Dr. Powers reviewed several reports authored by other experts. He did not, however, have access to Ms. Hardychuk's school records and was thus unable to compare her post-accident performance on testing to her pre-accident baseline. That being said, her cognitive and aptitude testing produced scores that were generally within the average or low average range, with a few in the superior range. Her top four interest areas were identified as carpentry, medical service, writing and electronics.
119  As part of the foundation for his opinion, Dr. Powers assumed that Ms. Hardychuk continues to suffer from headaches, anxiety and depression in addition to chronic neck and back pain as a result of her soft tissue injuries. He also assumed that, after the accident, she returned to work as a cabinetmaker on light duties in an accommodated capacity until October 2010. He further assumed that Ms. Hardychuk stopped working as a cabinetmaker because she was physically and cognitively unable to maintain competitive employment.
120  Based on the foregoing assumptions Dr. Powers opined that Ms. Hardychuk is competitively unemployable for the foreseeable future, at least until her medical condition improves substantially. He also opined that she should attend a chronic pain management program, participate in vocational rehabilitation and retrain for less physically demanding work, preferably in a job training rather than formal educational setting.
Mr. McNeil
121  Mr. Russell McNeil is an occupational therapist and certified work capacity evaluator. He saw Ms. Hardychuk on April 28, 2011 for assessment of her work capacity and other functional abilities. Mr. McNeil performed a full day of physical testing, interviewed Ms. Hardychuk and reviewed reports and records of other experts. He prepared a report dated May 15, 2011 setting out his findings, opinion and recommendations for care.
122  Mr. McNeil expressed the view that Ms. Hardychuk showed high levels of effort throughout the testing he administered. Given the results, this view is, at best, surprising. On virtually all of the tests Ms. Hardychuk performed at below average levels for her age and sex; in other words, she demonstrated less strength, less endurance, less ability to sit, less ability to walk, less ability to lift, push, pull and carry than an average woman of her age. On one of the tests she scored at the first percentile. Although Ms. Hardychuk misinformed Mr. McNeil about the extent of her post-accident employment and recreational activities, he knew she was able to work as a cabinetmaker for four years.
123  Mr. NcNeil opined that Ms. Hardychuk did not have the physical strength or stamina to perform her previous work as a cabinetmaker on a full or even part-time basis. Taking into account the many restrictions he identified in her capacity for activity he concluded that her vocational alternatives are extremely limited. He also concluded that Ms. Hardychuk demonstrated many restrictions in her ability to perform tasks involving home and yard maintenance. He went on to recommend a wide range of interventions and supports to assist her functioning in regular activities.
CAUSATION
Legal Framework
124  The plaintiff must establish on a balance of probabilities that the defendant's negligence caused or materially contributed to an injury to justify compensation. The defendant's negligence need not be the sole cause of the injury so long as it is part of the cause beyond the range of de minimus. Causation need not be determined by scientific precision: Athey v. Leonati, .
125  The primary test for causation is the "but-for" test: but for the defendant's negligence would the plaintiff have suffered the injury? In exceptional circumstances (which do not arise in this case), the "material contribution" test may be applied. The "but-for" test recognizes that the plaintiff is entitled to compensation for negligent conduct only where there is a substantial connection between the injury in question and the defendant's conduct: Resurfice Corp. v. Hanke, .
126  Causation must be established on a balance of probabilities before the court proceeds to assess damages. As McLachlin, C.J.C. stated in Blackwater v. Plint, :
It is important to distinguish between causation as the source of the loss and the rules of damage assessment in tort. The rules of causation consider generally whether "but for" the defendant's acts, the plaintiff's damages would have been incurred on a balance of probabilities. Even though there may be several tortious and non-tortious causes of injury, so long as the defendant's act is a cause of the plaintiff's damage, the defendant is fully liable for that damage. The rules of damages then consider what the original position of the plaintiff would have been. The governing principle is that the defendant need not put the plaintiff in a better position than his original position and should not compensate the plaintiff for any damages he would have suffered anyway: [Athey] ...
127  The essential purpose of tort law is to place the plaintiff in the position he or she would have occupied but for the defendant's negligence. For this reason the defendant must take the plaintiff as he or she is found, even if the plaintiff's injuries are more severe than they would be for a normal person (the "thin skull rule"). On the other hand, the defendant need not compensate the plaintiff for any debilitating effects of a pre-existing condition which the plaintiff would have experienced in any event (the "crumbling skull rule"): Athey.
128  Where the plaintiff's injuries have multiple causes a question arises as to whether the injuries are divisible or indivisible. Divisible injuries can be separated so that their damages can be assessed independently. In contrast, indivisible injuries cannot be separated: Bradley v. Groves, .
129  If an injury is divisible, the plaintiff can recover from a particular defendant only the damages attributable to the injury caused or contributed to by that defendant. If the injury is indivisible, the plaintiff can recover from the defendant all of the damages attributable to the injury regardless of the contribution made by others. In each case, the determination will depend upon the facts found based on the evidence. In some cases of earlier and later injury in the same region of the body, the injuries may be divisible. In others, it may be impossible for the worsening of an injury to be divided up: Athey; Bradley.
130  Causation is sometimes asserted based primarily on a temporal relationship between the negligent conduct and injury in question. In such cases, close scrutiny of the evidence is required because the inference from a temporal sequence to a causal connection is not always reliable: White v. Stonestreet, .
Psychological Injury
131  Cases involving alleged psychological injuries require particularly close scrutiny of the evidence. As Newbury J.A. remarked in Sandegren v. Hardy , claims of debilitating pain that persists long past the usual recovery period are notoriously difficult for the court to assess.
132  Mr. Justice Lambert summarized the principles to be applied in assessing claims of psychological injury in Yoshikawa v. Yoshikawa and Yu :
It is important to understand what is established and what is not established by the decision in Maslen v. Rubenstein, . I propose to set out a number of principles extracted from the reasons of Mr. Justice Taylor, for the Court, in the Maslen case. The first point is a preliminary point and appears in Maslen at p. 133 under the heading "(a) The Background":
The plaintiff must establish that the pain, discomfort or weakness is "real" in the sense that the victim genuinely experiences it.
The remaining ten points are drawn from the part of the reasons headed "(b) The Basic Principles" at pp. 134 to 137:
The plaintiff must establish that his or her psychological problems have their cause in the defendant's unlawful act.
The plaintiff's psychological problems do not have their cause in the defendant's unlawful act if they arise from a desire on the plaintiff's part for such things as care, sympathy, relaxation or compensation.
The plaintiff's psychological problems do not have their cause in the defendant's unlawful wrongful act if the plaintiff could be expected to overcome them by his or her own inherent resources, or "will-power".
If psychological problems exist, or continue, because the plaintiff for some reason wishes to have them, or does not wish to end, their existence or continuation must be said to have a subjective, or internal, cause. (NOTE: I consider that this proposition must deal with the conscious mind, otherwise it seems to me to beg the question; see my first observation, later in this Part of these reasons.)
If a court could not say whether the plaintiff really desired to be free of the psychological problems, the plaintiff would not have established his or her case on the critical issue of causation.
Any question of mitigation, or failure to mitigate, arises only after causation has been established.
It is not sufficient to ask whether a psychological condition such as "chronic, benign pain syndrome" is "compensable". Such a psychological condition may be compensable or it may not. The identification of the symptoms as "chronic benign pain syndrome" does not resolve the questions of legal liability or the question of assessment of damages.
It is unlikely that medical practitioners can answer, as matters of expert opinion, the ultimate questions on which these cases often turn.
Mr. Justice Spencer, at trial in the Maslen case, put the overall test quite correctly in these words:
[C]hronic benign pain syndrome will attract damages ... where the plaintiff's condition is caused by the defendant and is not something within her control to prevent. If it is true of a chronic benign pain syndrome, then it will be true also of other psychologically-caused suffering where the psychological mechanism, whatever it is, is beyond the plaintiff's power to control and was set in motion by the defendant's fault.
There must be evidence of a "convincing" nature to overcome the improbability that pain will continue, in the absence of objective symptoms, well beyond the recovery period, but the plaintiff's own evidence, if consistent with the surrounding circumstances, may nevertheless suffice for the purpose.
...
I am sure Mr. Justice Taylor did not consider that the "basic" principles which he set out exhausted all the possibilities for the application of principle to the difficult problems in these cases. The general principles which apply in relation to causation in law will apply to psychological injury as they apply to physical injury.
Discussion
133  Ms. Hardychuk submits that she suffered serious and permanent injuries as a result of the accident. These include soft tissue injuries her to neck, shoulders and back leading to chronic pain, frequent headaches, cognitive deficits and psychological dysfunction. She also submits that she suffered post-traumatic stress disorder and a mild traumatic brain injury.
134  According to Ms. Hardychuk the symptoms of her injuries are widespread and seriously debilitating. They include daily back discomfort and pain, frequent headaches, reduced physical strength and stamina, cognitive deficits such as decreased memory and focus, and ongoing depression and anxiety. In her submission, these symptoms are all real in the sense that she genuinely experiences them, cannot overcome them by willpower and does not wish them to continue. But for the accident, she says they would not be present and the damages she has suffered would not have been incurred.
135  Defence counsel responds that Ms. Hardychuk has seriously exaggerated the nature and extent of the symptoms she suffers in connection with her soft tissue injuries. She has also failed to prove that she suffered post-traumatic stress disorder or a mild traumatic brain injury as a result of the accident.
136  I have concluded that Ms. Hardychuk's description of her physical, mental and emotional condition is exaggerated, although she has convinced herself otherwise. The reasons for this conclusion are outlined above and need not be repeated here. Although I accept that Ms. Hardychuk suffers from ongoing symptoms associated with her soft tissue injuries, I do not accept that she genuinely experiences them in the moment as intensely as she described in her testimony or that they are nearly so debilitating as she now claims.
137  In sum, I am satisfied that Ms. Hardychuk suffered soft tissue injuries to her neck, shoulders and back which reached a recovery plateau within two years of the accident, leaving her with residual symptoms of back discomfort, occasional flaring pain and periodic headaches. The persistence of these symptoms has frustrated and sometimes fatigued Ms. Hardychuk, but it has not prevented her from resuming her vocational and other activities. Their persistence also did not trigger or evolve into a mood disorder nor do they interfere with her cognitive capabilities.
138  I accept that Ms. Hardychuk suffers from depression, anxiety and emotional dysfunction. The cause and onset of these conditions is unclear on the evidence presented, however, although they have apparently been notable since early 2009. In particular, I am not persuaded that there is a substantial connection between Ms. Hardychuk's mood disorder symptoms and her accident-related injuries. On the other hand, I am satisfied that she suffered a mild traumatic brain injury and post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of the accident, the symptoms of which have long since resolved.
139  As noted, in reaching this conclusion I have considered the entire body of evidence. Taking into account Ms. Hardychuk's vocational, academic and recreational activities and achievements since 2006, as well as the results of objective testing, in my view it best harmonizes with the preponderance of probabilities.
140  The expert evidence was of limited value, given the divergence between some of my factual findings and the assumptions underlying the opinions. For example, to varying degrees all of the experts assumed Ms. Hardychuk was significantly more functionally debilitated in her work and home life than I have found. In addition, none knew the details of her early history with depression, Ms. Hardychuk could not remember much and her mother did not testify to clarify the matter. This evidentiary hole seriously undermined the value of the expert opinions that drew a causal link between Ms. Hardychuk's depression and her accident-related injuries. Further, objecting testing by Dr. Schmidt and Mr. McNeil produced results of questionable validity and incompatibility with her post-accident activities, including her four years of full-time employment as a cabinetmaker.
141  Despite the foregoing, I accept Dr. Cameron's diagnosis of a mild traumatic brain injury. The symptoms Ms. Hardychuk reported at their meeting in August, 2006 generally accord with my factual findings and her experience in the accident is consistent with his conclusion. All things considered, I am satisfied that, as Dr. Cameron opined, the problems with cognition Ms. Hardychuk experienced for the first few months post-accident were attributable to a mild traumatic brain injury. I am also satisfied that, as he further opined, she suffered no long-term residual cognitive deficits as a result.
142  I also accept Dr. Schmidt's 2007 diagnosis of well encapsulated post-traumatic stress disorder. Again, I do so largely on the basis that the facts he assumed in support of the diagnosis generally accord with my findings. As noted, Ms. Hardychuk's symptoms, the most serious of which is nightmares, have reduced significantly since the accident. In addition, her driving and other habits of daily life are unimpaired by this condition.
143  The injuries Ms. Hardychuk suffered in the June 29, 2011 accident are divisible from those suffered in the May 20, 2006 accident. As outlined above, her persistent residual symptoms were well established by the time she was in the subsequent collision. Accordingly, damages can be assessed independently between the two accidents.
144  As to prognosis, I conclude Ms. Hardychuk's ongoing accident-related symptoms will likely improve further with proper treatment, including pain management counselling, physiotherapy and massage. I accept, however, that her symptoms may never fully resolve. In reaching this conclusion I rely to some degree on the opinions of Dr. Rampersaud and Dr. Hershler regarding Ms. Hardychuk's future prognosis. Although the factual foundations of their opinions differ somewhat from my findings, particularly as to her functional limitations, the general information provided and applied with respect to future prognosis is helpful and illuminating.
DAMAGES
Non-Pecuniary Damages
Legal Framework
145  Non-pecuniary damages are awarded to compensate the plaintiff for pain, suffering, loss of enjoyment of life and loss of amenities. The compensation awarded should be fair to all parties. Fairness is measured against awards made in comparable cases, which, though helpful, serve only as a rough guide to appropriate compensation. Each case will depend on its own unique facts: Trites v. Penner, .
146  In Stapley v. Hejslet, , the Court of Appeal outlined the factors for consideration when assessing non-pecuniary damages. The court stated:
The inexhaustive list of common factors cited in Boyd [Boyd v. Harris, ] that influence an award of non-pecuniary damages includes:
age of the plaintiff;
nature of the injury;
severity and duration of pain;
disability;
emotional suffering; and
loss or impairment of life;
I would add the following factors, although they may arguably be subsumed in the above list:
impairment of family, marital and social relationships;
impairment of physical and mental abilities;
loss of lifestyle; and
the plaintiff's stoicism (as a factor that should not, generally speaking, penalize the plaintiff: Giang v. Clayton, ).
147  The assessment of non-pecuniary damages is influenced by the plaintiff's personal experiences in dealing with his or her injuries and their consequences, as well as the plaintiff's ability to articulate that experience. A functional approach should be employed by the court. In so doing, a clear appreciation of the individual plaintiff's loss and need for reasonable solace is the key: Dilello v. Montgomery, ; Dikey v. Samieian, .
Position of the Parties
148  Counsel for Ms. Hardychuk submits the range for non-pecuniary damages established by comparable cases is between <damage type = "other">$170,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$230,000</damage>. Based on his characterization of her condition, he seeks an award of <damage type = "other">$215,000</damage>.
149  Counsel's submission is based on the assertion that Ms. Hardychuk suffers from debilitating back and neck pain, cognitive impairment and emotional dysfunction associated with widespread chronic pain and a mild traumatic brain injury. It is also based on the position that she cannot work as a cabinetmaker, has limited alternative employment opportunities and is unable to engage in most of her former sporting activities.
150  In support of his submission, counsel for Ms. Hardychuk relies upon the following case authorities: Bransford v. Yilmazcan, ; Sirna v. Smolinski, ; Taraviras v. Lovig, ; Danicek v. Alexander Holburn Beaudin & Lang, ; Cikojevic v. Timm, ; and Bouchard v. Brown Bros. Motor Lease Canada Ltd., .
151  In Bransford, the 26-year-old plaintiff suffered chronic neck and arm pain that were associated with thoracic outlet syndrome. Her condition deteriorated over time and she went from enjoying a healthy, active lifestyle to an unemployed state of near semi-invalidity. On appeal from a jury award that exceeded, and was reduced to, the upper limit, the Court of Appeal awarded <damage type = "other">$225,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages.
152  In Sirna, the 22-year-old plaintiff suffered a mild traumatic brain injury which compromised her attention span, memory, energy level and sense of smell. She also suffered soft tissue injuries to her neck and back, a hip injury and ongoing depression. As a result, she could no longer continue her education and career path or participate in prior athletic endeavours. Her relationships were also impacted negatively. The court awarded <damage type = "other">$200,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages (which adjusts to approximately <damage type = "other">$215,000</damage> for inflation).
153  In Taraviras, the 44-year-old plaintiff suffered neck and back injuries that led for six years to severe leg pain and, eventually, spinal decompression treatment. Thereafter, he was left with persistent dull back pain, moderate disability and a devastated previously active sporting life. On appeal from a jury award, the Court of Appeal awarded <damage type = "other">$200,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages.
154  In Danicek, the 32-year-old plaintiff suffered a mild traumatic brain injury, soft tissue injuries, and persistent debilitating headaches. Her life was profoundly affected by these injuries, particularly in connection with her compromised ability to work as a lawyer. The court awarded <damage type = "other">$185,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages.
155  In Cikojevic, the 17-year-old plaintiff suffered soft tissue injuries to her back and neck leading to chronic pain and a mild traumatic brain injury. As a result of her injuries, her likely career path was significantly compromised and she was restricted in her previous abilities and enjoyment with respect to sports. The court awarded <damage type = "other">$160,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages.
156  In Bouchard, the 26-year-old plaintiff suffered soft tissue injuries to his back and neck leading to chronic pain, legal cramps, a sleep disorder, and anxiety. These injuries contributed to the breakdown of his marriage and unemployment. The court awarded <damage type = "other">$160,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages.
157  Counsel for Ms. Hardychuk submits her injuries and their effects are generally comparable to those suffered by the plaintiffs in the above noted cases. He says the most similar case is Sima and seeks a similar award.
158  Defence counsel submits the appropriate award for non-pecuniary damages is <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage>. Her submission is based on her assertion that Ms. Hardychuk's complaints of physical and emotional pain, and their effects on her life, are significantly exaggerated. In so far as her complaints are genuine, she relies on the assertion that Ms. Hardychuk is likely to recover further as time goes by.
159  In support of her submission, defence counsel relies upon Le (Guardian ad litem) v. Milburn, , 1987 CarswellBC 1589 and Schweighardt v. Palamara, .
160  In Le, the 17-year-old plaintiff suffered a concussion, multiple abrasions and a chip fracture through the C5 cervical spine vertebrae. Although she had no permanent organic brain damage, she experienced post-concussion syndrome symptoms such as memory loss, anxiety and irritability in the following year. Her prospects for a full recovery were good. The court awarded <damage type = "other">$25,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages (which adjusts to approximately <damage type = "other">$44,000</damage> for inflation).
161  In Schweighardt, the 34-year-old plaintiff suffered soft tissue injuries to her back, shoulders, neck and hips which led to depression, chronic pain and anxiety. Four years after the accident she was unemployed, but with proper treatment she would be able to return to work. The court awarded <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages (which adjusts to approximately <damage type = "other">$46,700</damage> for inflation).
Discussion
162  I have found that Ms. Hardychuk suffered soft tissue injuries to her neck, shoulders and back in the accident. After a two-year process of gradual recovery, these injuries left her with residual symptoms of back discomfort, occasional flaring pain and periodic headaches. Ms. Hardychuk also suffered post-traumatic stress disorder and a mild traumatic brain injury as a result of the accident. The symptoms of her post-traumatic stress disorder are well encapsulated, resolving and non-debilitating. The mild traumatic brain injury caused Ms. Hardychuk to suffer cognitive deficits for several months but those symptoms have now fully resolved.
163  As a result of her ongoing soft tissue injury symptoms Ms. Hardychuk experiences pain, frustration, and fatigue, but not a mood disorder or cognitive deficits. Her vocational, home and recreational activities have been somewhat modified, but she has not been rendered sedentary or unemployable. As discussed below, her decision to leave her cabinetmaking job in 2010 is not causally related to the accident, nor is her state of depression. The prognosis for further improvement in her ongoing accident-related symptoms is good, but she may never recover fully.
164  Before the accident, Ms. Hardychuk was an extraordinarily athletic and physically-oriented young woman. Vigorous, enthusiastic, unimpeded physical activity in her work and recreational pursuits was, for her, a major pleasure in life. For this reason the compromise to her physical state and activities caused by her ongoing symptoms, while not highly debilitating, represents an unusually significant loss for which she is entitled to be fully compensated. That being said, her loss is not nearly of the nature or magnitude of those addressed in the cases cited by her counsel. It is, however, somewhat greater than those addressed in the cases cited by counsel for the defence.
165  All things considered, I conclude that an award of <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$60,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages is appropriate in the circumstances of this case.
Loss of Housekeeping Capacity
Legal Framework
166  Housekeeping services have economic value. The loss or impairment of a plaintiff's capacity to perform them is, therefore, compensable: Harrington v. Sangha, .
167  The governing principles that apply to awards for the loss or impairment of housekeeping capacity were summarised by Newbury J.A. in Dykeman v. Porohowski, . As noted by Dardi J. in X. v. Y., :
246 ... She affirmed that damages for the loss of housekeeping capacity may be awarded even though the plaintiff has not incurred any expense because housekeeping services were gratuitously replaced by a family member. Recovery may be allowed for both the future loss of ability to perform household tasks as well as for the loss of such abilities prior to trial. The amount of compensation awarded must be commensurate with the plaintiff's loss: Dykeman at para. 29.
168  When housekeeping services have been provided by other household members a claim for compensation must be scrutinised carefully. Although grievous injury need not be established, the court should ask whether the services went above and beyond the ordinary give and take to be expected in a home and were required by the plaintiff's injuries or would have been performed in any event. A relatively minor adjustment of duties within a household will not justify a discrete award under this head of damages: Dykeman, Campbell v. Banman, .
Position of the Parties
169  Counsel for Ms. Hardychuk submits this is a case in which the loss of housekeeping capacity is significant enough to warrant a separate and substantial award under this head of damages. He seeks an award for past and future loss of housekeeping capacity in the range of <damage type = "other">$220,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$325,000</damage>.
170  Counsel's submission is based on his assertion that Ms. Hardychuk cannot perform most household chores due to her ongoing back pain. It is also based on the position that her loss of housekeeping capacity is unlikely ever to change. He further asserts that Ms. Hardychuk will likely experience significant difficulties in the future with child care due to her injuries. Accordingly, he seeks additional compensation for the extra assistance that he says will be required during the child-rearing years.
171  Mr. McNeil opined that Ms. Hardychuk will likely need two hours of housekeeping assistance every week for heavy household duties, at an annual cost of <damage type = "other">$2,262</damage>. In addition, in his view she will likely need four hours of yard work and home maintenance every week for 30 weeks of the year, at an annual cost of <damage type = "other">$3,474</damage>. Counsel for Ms. Hardychuk relies on this evidence in support of his submission. He also points to an award of <damage type = "other">$195,000</damage> made to the 45-year-old plaintiff in Harrington and submits a larger award is appropriate in this case given the plaintiff's relative youth.
172  Defence counsel submits that no award should be made for loss of housekeeping capacity. Her submission is based on the assertion that Ms. Hardychuk's ability to perform household chores is not compromised to the extent that a separate award for impairment of housekeeping capacity is justified. In particular, even if she has found housework more difficult and time consuming since the accident, defence counsel submits that, as in Travis v. Kwon, , any such loss is appropriately addressed within the non-pecuniary damages award.
Discussion
173  I have found that Ms. Hardychuk finds heavy housework more difficult than she did before the accident. In consequence, she performs tasks more slowly than she did before and is sometimes left feeling stiff and sore. I have not found, however, that her capacity to perform housework is compromised to nearly the extent she claimed or Mr. McNeil assumed based on her reports and unreliable testing presentation. For that reason, Mr. NcNeil's opinion on this matter is of little, if any, evidentiary value.
174  Although Ms. Hardychuk's mother has sometimes helped her with housework since the accident and Ms. Vulcano does rather more than her fair share around the house, these are relatively minor adjustments of household duties. In my view, they do not justify a discrete award under this head of damages. Rather, I have taken the impact of Ms. Hardychuk's injuries on her housekeeping capacity into account in the non-pecuniary damages award.
Past Loss of Earning Capacity
Legal Framework
175  An award of damages for loss of earning capacity, whether in the past or the future, represents compensation for a pecuniary loss. The goal is to restore the plaintiff to the position he or she would have occupied but for the defendant's negligence. Accordingly, compensation for past loss of earning capacity is to be based on what the plaintiff would have, not could have, earned but for the accident-related injuries: Rowe v. Bobell Express Ltd., ; M.B. v. British Columbia, ; Gregory v. Insurance Corporation of British Columbia, .
176  Pursuant to s. 98 of the Insurance (Vehicle) Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 231, a plaintiff is entitled to recover damages for only his or her past net income loss. In the ordinary course this means the court must deduct the amount of income tax payable from lost gross earnings: Hudniuk v. Warkentin .
177  The burden of proof of actual past events is a balance of probabilities. An assessment of loss of both past and future earning capacity, however, involves consideration of hypothetical, not actual, events. The plaintiff is not required to prove hypothetical events on a balance of probabilities. Rather, the future or hypothetical possibility will be taken into consideration as long as it is a real and substantial possibility and not mere speculation: Athey; Falati v. Smith, ; aff'd .
178  As with the loss of future earning capacity, the court's task is to assess damages for past loss of capacity rather than to calculate them mathematically. Allowances for contingencies should be made and the award must be fair and reasonable taking into account all of the circumstances: Falati.
Position of the Parties
179  Counsel for Ms. Hardychuk seeks an award of <damage type = "other">$60,000</damage> in connection with the past wage loss component of this head of damages. In support of this submission he says Ms. Hardychuk lost three weeks of wages immediately after the accident, with a gross loss of <damage type = "other">$1,800</damage>. He goes on to say she also lost at least one week of wages every year until October 22, 2010 to attend accident-related medical appointments and 43 weeks of regular full-time work thereafter, with a total gross wage loss of <damage type = "other">$40,960</damage>. In addition, he says she would probably have earned approximately <damage type = "other">$2</damage> more per hour at Hycraft but for the accident and her associated limitations, leading to a further loss of <damage type = "other">$19,280</damage> in gross wages. He acknowledges the past loss figure on this aspect of the analysis should be adjusted to reflect income tax deductions.
180  Counsel for Ms. Hardychuk also seeks an award of between <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage> for past loss of earning capacity in connection with the loss of overtime and independent business opportunities. In his submission, the evidence establishes a real and substantial possibility that Ms. Hardychuk would have earned extra income from side jobs and renovating and flipping houses.
181  Counsel concedes that it would be difficult to estimate the profit Ms. Hardychuk might have earned from home renovations. He says, however, that at a minimum she would likely have put in 8-16 hours of labour per week beyond her regular work with Hycraft. On this analysis, calculated at a rate of <damage type = "other">$23</damage> per hour, he asserts that her additional loss over five years would be in the <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage> range.
182  Taking into account the foregoing, counsel for Ms. Hardychuk seeks an award of between <damage type = "other">$110,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$160,000</damage> for past wage loss and past loss of capacity to earn.
183  Defence counsel responds that Ms. Hardychuk is entitled to an award for no more than the three weeks of lost wages from Hycraft that immediately followed the accident. In support of this position, she submits that Ms. Hardychuk has failed to prove, on a balance of probabilities, that she sustained any additional past wage loss after she returned to work. She emphasizes there is no evidence as to how much work may have been missed as a result of Ms. Hardychuk's attendance for medical treatments. She also notes that Ms. Hardychuk was able to work after regular employment hours constructing her own kitchen cabinets and performing side jobs. In these circumstances, she says the award for past loss of earning capacity award should not exceed <damage type = "other">$1,800</damage>.
Discussion
184  I have found that Ms. Hardychuk missed three weeks of work at Hycraft immediately after the accident. When she returned she performed light duties for a few weeks and then resumed the full duties of her job. There is no reliable evidence regarding the extent, if any, to which she lost wages due to attendances for medical appointments. There is also no reliable evidence that she lost pay increases due to her soft tissue injury symptoms and associated work compromise. On the contrary, Ms. Hardychuk repeatedly received pay increases while she worked at Hycraft and progressed well in both skills and responsibility.
185  Despite the foregoing, I have also found that due to her soft tissue injuries Ms. Hardychuk required more assistance with heavy lifting at work than she did before the accident. She also took more breaks to maintain her stamina. Further, from time to time she complained of back pain and received massages from her co-workers. She was also more fatigued by work as a result of her residual back discomfort, headaches and occasionally flaring pain.
186  Significantly for purposes of this analysis, I am not persuaded that Ms. Hardychuk left her cabinetmaking job at Hycraft due to the effects of her accident-related injuries. Rather, she left because she was dissatisfied with the work environment and her productivity had been slipping since early 2010 for unrelated reasons. Those reasons no doubt include the impact of her depression on her overall attitude, focus and productivity, but that condition has not been reliably connected causally to the accident on the evidence presented. In these circumstances, she is not entitled to an award for lost wages since leaving her job at Hycraft.
187  I am also not persuaded that Ms. Hardychuk is disabled from working full-time as a cabinetmaker due to her accident-related injuries. On the contrary, she is demonstrably able to do so if she receives accommodations such as extra help with heavy lifting and extra breaks to maintain her stamina. Those accommodations were available to her at Hycraft without her employer even knowing that she needed them or learning she had a significant health problem. That being so, it is clear only minor accommodations are required for Ms. Hardychuk to work full-time in the cabinetmaking trade.
188  Nevertheless, I am persuaded there is a real and substantial possibility Ms. Hardychuk would have earned extra income by completing additional side jobs but for the accident. Her residual soft tissue injury symptoms caused fatigue, stiffness, and frustration, all of which slowed her down in connection with physical activity. Before the accident, Ms. Hardychuk was an unusually energetic, strong and hard-working young woman. Given those attributes, I am satisfied that but for the accident she would very likely have taken on more side jobs than she did to supplement her Hycraft income. She is entitled to an award to restore this aspect of her original position.
189  Although precision is impossible, particularly given the vagueness of the evidence regarding side jobs, I estimate Ms. Hardychuk would probably have earned something in the range of <damage type = "other">$3,600</damage> to <damage type = "other">$4,000</damage> in extra side job income each year had she not been suffering from the symptoms of her soft tissue injuries. These figures are based on an assumed additional 180 to 200 hours of labour per year remunerated at <damage type = "other">$20</damage> per hour.
190  My task is to assess, not calculate, the value of Ms. Hardychuk's past loss of earning capacity allowing for contingencies and aiming for overall fairness. In my view the positive and negative contingencies cancel one another out. For example, it is possible that after May, 2006 Ms. Hardychuk would have devoted most of her after-hours time and energy to her sporting activities rather than to earning extra income through side jobs. It is equally possible that she would have put in more additional hours working side jobs than I have assumed.
191  All things considered, including the need to compensate Ms. Hardychuk for the three weeks of wage loss suffered immediately after the accident, I assess her past loss of income and income earning capacity at <damage type = "past wage loss">$20,000</damage>.
Loss of Future Earning Capacity
Legal Framework
192  A claim for loss of future earning capacity raises two key questions: 1) has the plaintiff's earning capacity been impaired by his or her injuries; and, if so 2) what compensation should be awarded for the resulting financial harm that will accrue over time? The assessment of loss must be based on the evidence, and not an application of a purely mathematical calculation. The appropriate means of assessment will vary from case to case: Brown v. Golaiy ; Pallos v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia ; Pett v. Pett, .
193  The assessment of damages is a matter of judgment, not calculation: Rosvold v. Dunlop, .
194  Insofar as is possible, the plaintiff should be put in the position he or she would have been in, from a work life perspective, but for the injuries caused by the defendant's negligence. Ongoing symptoms alone do not mandate an award for loss of earning capacity. Rather, the essential task of the Court is to compare the likely future of the plaintiff's working life if the accident had not happened with the plaintiff's likely future working life after its occurrence: Lines v. W & D Logging Co. Ltd., ; Moore v. Cabral et. al., ; Gregory v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia, .
195  There are two possible approaches to assessment of loss of future earning capacity: the "earnings approach" from Pallos; and the "capital asset approach" in Brown. Both approaches are correct and will be more or less appropriate depending on whether the loss in question can be quantified in a measurable way: Perren v. Lalari, .
196  The earnings approach involves a form of math-oriented methodology such as i) postulating a minimum annual income loss for the plaintiff's remaining years of work, multiplying the annual projected loss by the number of remaining years and calculating a present value or ii) awarding the plaintiff's entire annual income for a year or two: Pallos; Gilbert v. Bottle, .
197  The capital asset approach involves considering factors such as i) whether the plaintiff has been rendered less capable overall of earning income from all types of employment; ii) is less marketable or attractive as a potential employee; iii) has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities that might otherwise have been open; and iv) is less valuable to herself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market: Brown; Gilbert.
198  The principles that apply in assessing loss of future earning capacity were summarized by Low J.A. in Reilly v. Lynn, :
101 The relevant principles may be briefly summarized. The standard of proof in relation to future events is simple probability, not the balance of probabilities, and hypothetical events are to be given weight according to their relative likelihood: Athey v. Leonati,  at para. 27. A plaintiff is entitled to compensation for real and substantial possibilities of loss, which are to be quantified by estimating the chance of the loss occurring: Athey v. Leonati, supra, at para. 27, Steenblok v. Funk  at 135 (C.A.). The valuation of the loss of earning capacity may involve a comparison of what the plaintiff would probably have earned but for the accident with what he will probably earn in his injured condition: Milina v. Bartsch  at 93 (S.C.). However, that is not the end of the inquiry; the overall fairness and reasonableness of the award must be considered: Rosvold v. Dunlop,  at para. 11; Ryder v. Paquette,  (C.A.). Moreover, the task of the Court is to assess the losses, not to calculate them mathematically: Mulholland (Guardian ad litem of) v. Riley Estate  (C.A.). Finally, since the course of future events is unknown, allowance must be made for the contingency that the assumptions upon which the award is based may prove to be wrong: Milina v. Bartsch, supra, at 79 ...
Position of the Parties
199  Counsel for Ms. Hardychuk seeks an award of <damage type = "other">$1,000,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$1,500,000</damage> for her loss of future earning capacity. In his submission, on either an earnings or capital asset approach her future loss is of this magnitude given her youth, well established pre-accident career path, the effect of her injuries on that path and her compromised physical and emotional state.
200  Counsel's submission is based on his assertion that Ms. Hardychuk has completely lost her capacity to work in the construction industry. If she does work again he says it will likely be in a minimum wage job and probably limited to part-time. Had she continued employment as a full-time cabinetmaker, however, there is a real and substantial possibility she would have become a foreman by age 35 and consistently earned a solid middle class income. There is also a lesser, but real, possibility she would have earned considerably more as a renovation entrepreneur.
201  Applying an earnings approach counsel submits that, but for the accident, Ms. Hardychuk would likely have earned something in the range of <damage type = "other">$2,289,000</damage> in regular wages over the course of her working lifetime. As a result of the accident, however, he says she is likely to earn only something in the range of <damage type = "other">$616,000</damage>. The difference is approximately <damage type = "other">$1,666,000</damage>, for an average annual wage loss in the range of <damage type = "other">$41,659</damage>. When this figure is discounted by 2.5% for present value he says her lifetime net wage earning capacity loss is <damage type = "other">$1,045,762</damage>. He also says she would have earned at least an additional <damage type = "other">$200,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$400,000</damage> in other project work.
202  Counsel goes on to say that a capital asset approach to assessment produces a similar value for Ms. Hardychuk's diminished future earning capacity. In advancing this submission, he says she is now significantly less capable of performing most types of employment due to her chronic back and neck pain, as well as her associated cognitive, memory and emotional compromise. She is also less attractive as a potential employee due to her permanent partial disabilities; has lost the ability to take advantage of otherwise available job opportunities such as cabinetmaking and home renovations; and is less valuable to herself as a skilled and capable income earner.
203  Defence counsel responds that Ms. Hardychuk is not entitled to any award for loss of future earning capacity. In support of this submission she emphasises that Ms. Hardychuk was able to work in a competitive environment for four years after the accident. At the same time she studied for and passed three apprenticeship levels at B.C.I.T., played various sports, built her own kitchen cabinets and performed some side jobs. Further, she left her job at Hycraft for reasons unrelated to the effects of her soft tissue injuries.
204  Defence counsel goes on to say that Ms. Hardychuk is likely to continue her recovery in the future with appropriate treatment. All things considered, if the court is satisfied Ms. Hardychuk's future earning capacity has been impaired she submits the award should be no greater than a single year's salary.
Discussion
205  Most of the facts relevant to analysis of Ms. Hardychuk's loss of future earning capacity are outlined in the preceding section. Accordingly, there is no need to repeat them. In summary, I have concluded Ms. Hardychuk has not lost her capacity to work as a full-time cabinetmaker due to her accident-related injuries. There is a real and substantial possibility, however, that since the accident she would have taken on more side jobs had it not occurred. I also conclude this likelihood would have continued into the future. I further conclude that the prospect she will open her own veneer shop has been modestly reduced.
206  This is not a case in which the loss of future earning capacity can be easily measured and quantified. Ms. Hardychuk was in the very early stages of her cabinetmaking career when the accident happened and a clear pattern of overall income-earning had not yet emerged. Accordingly, I prefer the capital asset approach to assessment of her loss.
207  Applying the capital asset approach I find that Ms. Hardychuk has been rendered less capable of earning income through side jobs and self-employment by virtue of her reduced energy and physicality associated with her soft tissue injuries. She is also less attractive as a potential employee given her need for minor accommodations at work; has the lost the ability to take advantage of opportunities that might otherwise have been open; and is less valuable to herself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive construction market.
208  Despite the foregoing, Ms. Hardychuk's future prognosis is reasonably positive. With proper treatment, such as pain management counselling, physiotherapy and massage, her accident-related symptoms will likely continue to improve. That being said, there is also a real possibility that her symptoms may never resolve fully and the associated compromise to her earning capacity may be permanent. This possibility is real, but relatively low. Other contingencies, such as the risk that unrelated impediments to future income-earning such as debilitating depression would have reduced her capacity regardless are offset by the equally likely possibility that, with greater physical stamina, she would have earned substantial profits by renovating and flipping properties.
209  All things considered, I conclude an appropriate award for Ms. Hardychuk's loss of future earning capacity is <damage type = "future wage loss">$75,000</damage>.
Costs of Future Care
Legal Framework
210  The plaintiff is entitled to compensation for the cost of future care based on what is reasonably necessary to restore him or her to the pre-accident condition in so far as that is possible. When full restoration cannot be achieved, the court must strive to assure full compensation through the provision of adequate future care. The future care award is to be based on what is reasonably necessary on the medical evidence to preserve and promote the plaintiff's mental and physical health: Milina v. Bartsch  (S.C.); Williams (Guardian ad litem of) v. Low,  (S.C.); Spehar (Guardian ad litem of) v. Beazley,  (S.C.).
211  The test for determining the appropriate award for the cost of future care is an objective one based on medical evidence. For an award of future care: (1) there must be a medical justification for claims for cost of future care; and (2) the claims must be reasonable: Milina.
212  Future care costs must be justified both because they are medically necessary and they are likely to be incurred by the plaintiff. The award of damages is thus a matter of prediction as to what will happen in future. If a plaintiff has not used a particular item or service in the past it may be inappropriate to include its cost in a future care award: Izony v. Weidlich, .
213  The extent, if any, to which a future care costs award should be adjusted for contingencies depends on the specific care needs of the plaintiff. In some cases negative contingencies are offset by positive contingencies and, therefore, a contingency adjustment is not required. In other cases, however, the award is reduced based on the prospect of improvement in the plaintiff's condition or increased based on the prospect that additional care will be required. Each case falls to be determined on its particular facts: Gilbert.
214  An assessment of damages for cost of future care is not a precise accounting exercise: Krangle (Guardian ad litem of) v. Brisco, .
Position of the Parties
215  Counsel for Ms. Hardychuk seeks an award in the range of <damage type = "other">$600,000</damage>. Counsel's submission is based on his assertion that Ms. Hardychuk requires psychological intervention, pain management modalities and job retraining to provide relief and restore her, in so far as is possible, to her pre-accident state. He relies heavily on the evidence of Dr. Powers and Mr. McNeil in this regard.
216  Defence counsel responds that Ms. Hardychuk does not require the multitude of future care benefits recommended by Mr. McNeil in his report and testimony. In support of this submission she emphasises that none of Ms. Hardychuk's physicians have found a restricted range of motion in her neck, shoulders or back and she worked successfully as a cabinetmaker after the accident for four years. She also says that Ms. Hardychuk has not always followed the advice of her treatment providers, particularly with respect to taking anti-depressant medication. In these circumstances, she submits no award should be made under this head of damages.
Discussion
217  I have concluded that Ms. Hardychuk's ability to work as a full-time cabinetmaker has not been lost due to the accident. That being so, she does not require job retraining to restore her to her pre-accident state. She also does not require the multitude of devices and services Mr. McNeil recommended based on flawed assumptions regarding the nature and extent of her disabilities.
218  I accept, however, that, as Dr. Schmidt opined, Ms. Hardychuk's perceptions and coping mechanisms are not optimal and could interfere with her ability to deal with her residual soft tissue injury symptoms effectively. Accordingly, I conclude that she requires psychological counselling for pain management. She does not, however, require a residential program in this regard. I also accept that, as Dr. Rampersaud and Dr. Hershler opined, she will likely require intermittent physiotherapy and massage to help her cope with flare-ups of back pain. In addition, she will periodically require analgesics and muscle relaxants, as well as ongoing access to a gym. All of these future care items are medically necessary and likely to be incurred by Ms. Hardychuk.
219  Taking into account the likely costs of the foregoing, as outlined by Mr. McNeil, and considering the likelihood that Ms. Hardychuk's condition will improve over time I assess the cost of future care at <damage type = "future care">$10,000</damage>.
Special Damages
Legal Framework
220  An injured person is entitled to recover the reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred as a result of an accident. This is grounded in the fundamental governing principle that an injured person is to be restored to the position he or she would have been in had the accident not occurred: X.; Milina.
Position of the Parties
221  Counsel for Ms. Hardychuk seeks an award of <damage type = "other">$3,069</damage> for out-of-pocket expenses said to be incurred in connection with her accident-related injuries. In his submission, Ms. Hardychuk's testimony, together with that of her father, establishes her entitlement to such an award. The expenses claimed concern prescriptions for medication, massage therapy and physiotherapy.
222  Defence counsel responds that the evidence does not establish any entitlement under this head of damages. In particular, Mr. Hardychuk was unable to say whether various medical expenses, including massage and drug expenses, submitted to Sun Life were connected with the accident or whether reimbursement is required. In addition, and in any event, she notes Ms. Hardychuk had extended health coverage through Hycraft until October 2010 and, therefore, was generally reimbursed.
Discussion
223  The burden of proof is on a plaintiff to establish entitlement to an award for damages. In this case, Ms. Hardychuk's evidence as to out-of-pocket expenses was extremely vague and unreliable. For example, some of the prescriptions that were included in the special damages list are for antibiotics and plainly do not relate to the accident. In the circumstances, I am not satisfied she has discharged the burden of proof and find no entitlement has been established under this head of damages.
SUMMARY
224  In summary, damages are awarded as follows:
1.  Non-pecuniary damages <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$ 60,000</damage> 
2.  Past Loss of Income/ <damage type = "past wage loss">20,000</damage> 
  Earning Capacity  
3.  Future Loss of <damage type = "future wage loss">75,000</damage> 
  Earning Capacity  
4.  Cost of Future Care <damage type = "future care">10,000</damage> 
 TOTAL <damage type = "total">$165,000</damage> 
COSTS
225  If the parties are unable to agree on costs, they may speak to the issue.
G. DICKSON J.
End of Document
Najdychor v. Swartz, [2009] B.C.J. No. 1202
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
F.E. Verhoeven J.
Heard: April 27-30 and May 1, 4 and 5, 2009.
Judgment: June 17, 2009.
Docket: M063705
Registry: Vancouver
[2009] B.C.J. No. 1202   |      |
Between Monika Katherine Najdychor, Plaintiff, and Carrie Swartz and David Swartz, Defendant
(129 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Considerations — Extent of incapacity — Special damages — Past loss of income — Employment income — Non-pecuniary loss — Pain and suffering — Action by plaintiff for damages arising from motor vehicle accident allowed in part — Plaintiff sought $123,992 but awarded $98,712 — Defendant entirely liable — Plaintiff broke sternum and injured upper body and leg — Plaintiff mainly recovered three years later and expected to fully recover so $60,000 non-pecuniary awarded — Plaintiff missed seven weeks of work and later resigned because driving too painful — $11,206 past loss of income — $20,000 future loss of income but no future care costs awarded — Plaintiff's husband awarded $1,800 for work missed to care for plaintiff — $6,705 special damages claim accepted.
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Body injuries — Chest — Back and spine — Head injuries — Jaw — Action by plaintiff for damages arising from motor vehicle accident allowed in part — Plaintiff sought <damage type = "other">$123,992</damage> but awarded <damage type = "total">$98,712</damage> — Defendant entirely liable — Plaintiff broke sternum and injured upper body and leg — Plaintiff mainly recovered three years later and expected to fully recover so <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$60,000</damage> non-pecuniary awarded — Plaintiff missed seven weeks of work and later resigned because driving too painful — <damage type = "past wage loss">$11,206</damage> past loss of income — <damage type = "future wage loss">$20,000</damage> future loss of income but no future care costs awarded — Plaintiff's husband awarded <damage type = "in trust">$1,800</damage> for work missed to care for plaintiff — <damage type = "special">$6,705</damage> special damages claim accepted.
Tort law — Negligence — Contributory negligence — Proof of — Duty of care — Motor vehicles — Action by plaintiff for damages arising from motor vehicle accident allowed in part — Plaintiff awarded <damage type = "total">$98,712</damage> — Plaintiff was travelling in right lane and began to proceed through intersection when defendant's vehicle appeared directly in front of her vehicle — Plaintiff braked and swerved to avoid defendant but crashed into construction scaffolding and lamp standard — Defendant clearly did not have clear view of all three lanes before moving forward through intersection to make left turn — Plaintiff had right of way and was travelling at reasonable speed — Defendant entirely liable for accident.
Action by the plaintiff for damages arising from a motor vehicle accident. Both liability and quantum were at issue. The plaintiff was travelling in the right hand lane and proceeding through the intersection. The plaintiff testified that the defendant appeared suddenly in front of her and she attempted to brake and swerve to avoid the defendant's vehicle. The plaintiff's vehicle hit construction scaffolding and crashed head on into a lamp standard with considerable force. The defendant testified that she was creeping into the intersection to make a left turn and was waved ahead by drivers in the other two lanes. The defendant argued that the plaintiff must have been travelling at an extremely high speed because she suddenly appeared in front of the defendant. Witnesses recalled the plaintiff swerving to avoid the defendant. The plaintiff was 32 years old and in good health at the time of the accident. The plaintiff suffered a broken sternum and injuries to her forehead, neck, chest, abdomen and right leg and knee. She was completely immobile for the first week and her husband had to miss one week of work to care for her. The plaintiff missed seven weeks of work. The plaintiff later found a better paying job but had to resign because it involved driving, which was too painful due to her injuries. The plaintiff continued to attend acupuncture, massage and chiropractic treatments. It had been three years since the accident and her injuries had mostly been resolved and she was expected to fully recover in one year. The plaintiff sought <damage type = "other">$123,992</damage> in damages. 

HELD: Action allowed in part.
 The defendant was entirely liable for the accident. The defendant's recollection was clearly flawed as she recalled the plaintiff hitting a pole in the right hand lane that was not there. The defendant was inconsistent on the important detail of whether or not she could see into the plaintiff's lane before she moved further into the intersection. The plaintiff had the right of way and it was clear the defendant moved forward despite having an obstructed view, otherwise she would have seen the plaintiff approaching and stopped. The plaintiff was travelling at a reasonable rate of speed. The plaintiff suffered pain for three years but was expected to fully recover. She was awarded <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$60,000</damage> for non-pecuniary damages but this was reduced by <damage type = "reduction by">$1,000</damage> for her failure to undergo dental treatment immediately. The plaintiff's <damage type = "special">$6,705</damage> special damages claim was reasonable and accepted. She was not awarded anything for future costs of care given her good recovery prognosis. The plaintiff was awarded a total of <damage type = "past wage loss">$11,206</damage> for past loss of income. This was for the seven-week period following the accident and the time after her resignation, which was required because of her injuries. The job the plaintiff resigned from was better paying than her current job so she was awarded <damage type = "future wage loss">$20,000</damage> for future loss of income. The husband was awarded <damage type = "in trust">$1,800</damage> for business and income lost during his week at home caring for the plaintiff.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Motor Vehicles Act,
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: D.W. Hay.
Counsel for the Defendants: D. Neumann.
Reasons for Judgment
F.E. VERHOEVEN J.
Introduction
1  The plaintiff Monika Najdychor claims damages arising out of a motor vehicle accident which occurred on Tuesday, June 13, 2006 at the intersection of 8th Avenue and Cambie Street in Vancouver. Both liability and quantum are in issue.
The Accident
2  At the date of the accident, Ms. Najdychor was 32 years of age. She was employed as a retail operations manager at the offices of her employer in Yaletown, in downtown Vancouver.
3  On the day of the accident, she left work intending to drive to her home in Ladner. At about 5:10 p.m., she was proceeding southbound on Cambie Street, driving her 1991 Honda Civic. The weather was clear and sunny. She was intending to turn right on Broadway (9th Avenue) in order to proceed to Oak Street and continue on to her home. Southbound traffic on Cambie Street was heavy. Ms. Najdychor was familiar with the area. She knew there was a right turn only lane on Cambie Street at the intersection of Broadway, which she was intending to use to make the turn onto Broadway. At approximately 6th Avenue, she changed lanes from the middle lane of three lanes to the curb lane.
4  The intersection at 7th Avenue is controlled by traffic lights. She proceeded through the 7th Avenue intersection in the curb lane without incident.
5  Cambie Street and 8th Avenue is an uncontrolled intersection. There is a slight uphill grade as one proceeds southbound towards Broadway. There are three lanes for through traffic in each direction. There is a left turn lane for southbound traffic on Cambie Street to turn eastbound into 8th Avenue, and a corresponding left turn lane for northbound traffic on Cambie Street to turn left, or westbound, onto 8th Avenue.
6  The curb lane ahead of Ms. Najdychor was clear as she approached the intersection of 8th Avenue and Cambie Street. She testified that as she approached the intersection, there were cars in the two lanes to her left (lanes one and two) which were moving, but more slowly than she was. She testified that her speed was 40 to 50 kph. She says that as she entered into the intersection of 8th and Cambie, a vehicle suddenly appeared in front of her. That was the defendant's vehicle attempting a left hand turn from northbound on Cambie Street to proceed westbound on 8th Avenue. The plaintiff testified that she did not see the defendant's vehicle until it was "right in front of me". She attempted to avoid hitting the defendant's vehicle by swerving and braking. She swerved to the right, but was unable to manoeuvre her vehicle back into the curb lane. She ended up hitting a metal lamp standard located on the sidewalk, a few inches away from the curb, and several feet south of the southwest corner of 8th Avenue and Cambie Street.
7  No engineering or traffic reconstruction evidence was presented. However, it is obvious from the post-crash photographs of the plaintiff's vehicle and from the evidence of other witnesses that the plaintiff's car hit the lamp standard head on, almost in the centre of the front end of her vehicle.
8  Emergency personnel attended. The plaintiff was taken to Vancouver General Hospital by ambulance for treatment. Her vehicle was not equipped with airbags. She sustained a fractured sternum and other injuries which will be described in further detail below. Her vehicle was written off.
9  The defendant, Carrie Swartz, was approximately 36 years of age at the date of the accident. She resided in Langley. She was driving her 2001 dark blue Pontiac Grand Am, which was owned by her husband, the defendant David Swartz. Her three children were in the back seat of the vehicle. She was expecting her fourth child. She and her children had been at the Oakridge shopping centre for a dental appointment, and had proceeded north on Cambie Street in order to go to a Boy Scout store to purchase a book. The store was located on Broadway, west of Cambie Street. She thought the accident happened at about 5:10 p.m. She said that the store closed at 5:30 p.m. and that she was not in a rush. She had thought that she could turn left at Cambie and Broadway, but found that she could not, and therefore proceeded to the next intersection which was 8th Avenue, in order to make a left turn and proceed westbound on 8th Avenue.
10  She testified that the traffic facing her in the lane nearest the centre line (lane one) had stopped and the driver of the lead vehicle in that lane had waved her through. The driver of the lead vehicle in lane two also waved her through. She said she made eye contact with the drivers of the lead vehicles in both the first and second lanes. She thought that as she passed the second lane, the front of her vehicle had protruded only about one foot into the third or curb lane. At that moment, she was stopped, or nearly stopped, when the vehicle driven by the plaintiff was "suddenly there".
11  Ms. Swartz recalled that there was a construction site at the southwest corner of 8th Avenue and Cambie Street. She thought that after the plaintiff's vehicle swerved, it hit a "construction pole" which was on the travel-worthy portion of the roadway. She thought that the plaintiff's vehicle was not on the curb or the sidewalk and nowhere near the street lamp standard that the plaintiff described hitting.
12  Ms. Swartz said that prior to moving into the curb lane, she had looked into that lane and seen no oncoming cars. She testified that the vehicles in lane one and two were very close to her, being only three feet away from her vehicle. At trial, she conceded that her view northbound into the curb lane was obscured by the vehicles in front of her, and that she could only see about one car length northbound into the curb lane. By contrast, on examination for discovery, she said that she had a clear and unobstructed view of the curb lane prior to entering it. She acknowledged on cross-examination that her estimate of a one foot encroachment into the curb lane at the time which she saw the plaintiff's vehicle was really a guess.
13  She first observed the plaintiff's vehicle when it was already in the intersection. She said things happened very quickly. She saw the car swerve. She was frightened, and she threw up her hands in reaction to the near collision. She thought her vehicle was going to be struck by the plaintiff's vehicle. She assumed that the plaintiff's vehicle must have been traveling at a high rate of speed because she "came from out of nowhere". However, she conceded that she actually had no ability whatsoever to estimate the speed of the plaintiff's vehicle before the collision.
14  After the accident, Ms. Swartz proceeded to complete her left hand turn into 8th Avenue. She stopped and went back to the accident scene.
15  She remained at the scene until about 6:00 p.m.
16  There were two independent witnesses to the accident.
17  Ms. Susan Adams and her then 14 year old son, Eldon Cruickshank, were walking northbound on the west side of Cambie Street, between 8th Avenue and Broadway.
18  Eldon Cruickshank was very familiar with the area. He recalled there was a lot of construction on that block. He and his mother were walking under construction scaffolding. There were narrow metal poles to their left and right, which supported a wooden roof. The scaffolding went all the way between 8th Avenue and Broadway. The scaffolding poles were metal, about one and half inches in diameter and arranged in a criss-cross pattern. There were no scaffolding poles on the street.
19  Based on the scene diagram, Mr. Cruickshank estimated his distance from the intersection at about 120 feet at the time of the accident. He saw the plaintiff's red Honda travelling towards them in the curb lane. The red car swerved to avoid the defendant's dark-coloured car. The plaintiff's red car hit two of the metal scaffolding poles and then struck the green lamp standard whereupon it came to rest. The two scaffolding poles were set loose and tumbled towards Mr. Cruickshank and his mother.
20  He thought that the defendant's vehicle had protruded by a foot into the curb lane at the time the plaintiff's red car swerved to avoid it. He thought the defendant's car had stopped just as the red car went by it.
21  Ms. Adams testified to similar effect. She said she was walking northbound on Cambie Street with her son, Eldon. They were headed to the Best Buy store in the area. The construction scaffolding was covering the sidewalk, but was not protruding onto the roadway at all. It was rush hour and the traffic was heavy. She thought the defendant's car was moving slowly through the intersection, creeping forward as it approached the curb lane, when the plaintiff's red car came up the hill, swerved, then moved in an arc back into the curb lane. It struck the construction scaffolding, which was thrown towards her and her son.
22  Constable Melanie Tomlinson of the Vancouver Police Department attended the accident scene. She particularly remembered that the construction scaffolding had been knocked loose. She was concerned about the hazardous condition that resulted. She attended at about 5:30 p.m., before the plaintiff was taken away by the ambulance. She recalled that the whole front of the plaintiff's vehicle was pushed in and had come to rest around the lamp standard. She testified that the speed limit in the area was 50 kph.
Analysis regarding liability
23  Section 174 of the Motor Vehicle Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 318 [the "Act"] provides as follows:
When a vehicle is in an intersection and its driver intends to turn left, the driver must yield the right of way to traffic approaching from the opposite direction that is in the intersection or so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, but having yielded and given a signal as required by sections 171 and 172, the driver may turn the vehicle to the left, and traffic approaching the intersection from the opposite direction must yield the right of way to the vehicle making the left turn.
24  The section and its predecessors have been considered in many cases. A leading decision is Pacheco (Guardian ad litem) v. Robinson ,  (C.A.).
25  In that case, the trial judge found that the defendant was in the course of a left hand turn when she struck the plaintiff who was riding a bicycle, which is a vehicle for purposes of the Act. The trial judge found that neither party saw the other until a fraction of second prior to the actual impact. The trial judge held that at the moment the defendant commenced her turn, the plaintiff cyclist was in the intersection. The trial judge held that while the defendant was clearly liable, the plaintiff ought to have exercised caution as he approached the intersection. He had failed to keep a proper lookout, and was liable to the extent of 25%. The Court of Appeal reversed the finding of contributory negligence and found the defendant 100% liable. Justice Legg, for the court, stated at paras. 10-11 as follows:
In my respectful opinion, the learned trial judge erred in law in finding the appellant contributory negligent. A defendant who wishes to make a left hand turn in an intersection has an obligation to yield to on-coming traffic which is in the intersection under the provision of s. 176 of the Motor Vehicle Act.
The plaintiff was not bound to guard against every conceivable eventuality but only against such eventualities as a reasonable person ought to have foreseen as being within the ordinary range of human experience. The plaintiff was entitled to proceed on the assumption that all other vehicles will do what it is their duty to do, namely observe the rules regulating traffic.
26  After referring to a prior Court of Appeal decision in Etter v. Trent,  (C.A.), Legg J.A. further stated at paras. 15 & 18:
In my opinion, a driver who wishes to make a left hand turn at an intersection has an obligation not to proceed unless it can be done safely. Where each party's vision of the other is blocked by traffic, the dominant driver who is proceeding through the intersection is generally entitled to continue and the servient left-turning driver must yield the right of way. The existence of a left-turning vehicle does not raise a presumption that something unexpected might happen and cast a duty on the dominant driver to take extra care. Where the defendant, as here, has totally failed to determine whether a turn can be made safely, the defendant should be held 100 percent at fault for a collision which occurs.
[...]
In my opinion, when a driver in a servient position disregards his statutory duty to yield the right of way and a collision results, then to fix any blame on the dominant driver, the servient driver must establish that after the dominant driver became aware, or by the exercise of reasonable care should have become aware, of the servient driver's own disregard of the law, the dominant driver had a sufficient opportunity to avoid the accident of which a reasonably careful and skilful driver would have availed himself. In such circumstance any doubt should be resolved in favour of the dominant driver. As stated by Cartwright, J. in Walker v. Brownlee,  (S.C.C.) at p. 461:
While the decision of every motor vehicle collision case must depend on its particular facts, I am of opinion that when A, the driver in the servient position, proceeds through an intersection in complete disregard of his statutory duty to yield the right-of-way and a collision results, if he seeks to cast any portion of the blame upon B, the driver having the right-of-way, A must establish that after B became aware, or by the exercise of reasonable care should have become aware, of A's disregard of the law B had in fact a sufficient opportunity to avoid the accident of which a reasonably careful and skilful driver would have availed himself; and I do not think that in such circumstances any doubts should be resolved in favour of A, whose unlawful conduct was fons et origo mali.
27  The definition of "immediate hazard" as used within s. 174 was considered by the Court of Appeal in Raie v. Thorpe (1963), 43 W.W.R. 405 (B.C.C.A.). In that decision, Tysoe J.A. stated at p. 410:
I do not propose to attempt an exhaustive definition of "immediate hazard." For the purposes of this appeal it is sufficient for me to say that, in my opinion, if an approaching car is so close to the intersection when a driver attempts to make a left turn that a collision threatens unless there be some violent or sudden avoiding action on the part of the driver of the approaching car, the approaching car is an "immediate hazard" within the meaning of sec. 164.
28  Justice Davey dissented with respect to the result, but defined "immediate hazard" in a very similar way at p. 406. Justice Wilson concurred in the result by affirming the decision of the trial judge.
29  Another decision of the Court of Appeal is Nijjer v. Hildebrandt, , . In that case, the plaintiff was heading south on King George Highway while the defendant was attempting to make a left hand turn from King George Highway into a lane at the west side of the highway. A collision resulted. The trial judge found that liability should be split equally, on the basis that while the defendant should have seen the plaintiff's approaching vehicle, recognized that it constituted an immediate hazard, and yielded the right of way, the plaintiff was not keeping a proper lookout. Had he done so, he would have seen the defendant's vehicle initiate its turn, and would have had an opportunity to yield the right of way to the defendant.
30  After referring to the conclusion of the trial judge, Donald J.A., for the court, stated at para. 22:
22  The plaintiff had the clear right of way. The defendant made an unsafe turn in front of him. The plaintiff's momentary inattention could not have affected liability having regard to two decisions of this Court. 
31  The court went on to refer to Etter and Pacheco and ultimately set aside the trial judge's finding of contributory negligence, thus assigning 100% liability to the defendant.
32  Despite these appellate decisions, there are trial level decisions which have found the driver of the vehicle contributory negligent for proceeding straight through the intersection in the circumstances of these cases.
33  In Clark v. Stricker, , the plaintiff was proceeding westbound on Southeast Marine Drive towards the intersection of Chester Street. It was a dry and sunny day. At the intersection in question, Southeast Marine Drive comprises three lanes westbound and three lanes eastbound, with a median dividing east and westbound traffic. Traffic was heavy. The plaintiff was in the westbound curb lane. The plaintiff's view to her left was obscured or blocked by the presence of a large "cube" van in lane two (the middle lane). The traffic to her left was stopped due to the volume of traffic. The intersection of Chester Street was free of stopped cars. The defendant had been proceeding eastbound on Southeast Marine Drive and was making a left hand turn through the intersection to proceed north on Chester. Upon entering the curb lane, the defendant's vehicle struck the plaintiff's vehicle. Justice Melvin agreed with the submission of the defendant that any prudent driver proceeding westbound in the curb lane with traffic stopped to his or her left should exercise caution on entering the intersection, particularly as the westbound driver's view to his or her left will be obscured by the stopped traffic. The plaintiff in Clark was found 25% at fault for the accident. Justice Melvin stated at para. 10:
In my opinion, a prudent driver should anticipate that there is a reason for traffic to their left being stopped at an uncontrolled intersection. To enter the intersection under those circumstances without slowing or observing that it is clear of pedestrians or other vehicles, in my view, is negligent.
34  He found support for that proposition in the decision of the Ontario Court of Appeal in Nash v. Sullivan ,  (C.A.), a decision which is referred to, but distinguished in Pacheco at para. 23. In referring to and distinguishing Nash, I note that the court in Pacheco neither approved nor disapproved of the decision.
35  The decision of the Ontario Court of Appeal in Nash is very brief. The plaintiff was riding a motorcycle in the southbound curb lane as he approached the intersection. The curb lane was "partially blocked' by a car parked in the curb lane approximately 40 feet north of the intersection. The defendant, who was driving northbound, was making a left hand turn which would take him across the path of the plaintiff's southbound motorcycle. A car in the southbound centre lane had stopped to allow the defendant to make his left hand turn. The Court of Appeal held that the plaintiff had a duty to exercise care in the circumstances and that he was negligent in failing to slow his motorcycle and keep a proper lookout when he saw or should have seen that the cars in the line of traffic to his left had stopped. Furthermore, he had approached the intersection in such a manner that he was hidden from the view of motorists intending to make a left turn. That situation created an obligation upon him to act prudently. The Court went on to say at 134-135:
There is no question that a heavy onus rests upon the defendant driver attempting to make a left turn in the face of oncoming traffic but this was a most unusual situation and we do not feel that the standard to be imposed upon the defendant is a standard of perfection. It was a situation of potential danger of which both parties should have been aware.
36  The Court held that liability should be equally divided between the parties.
37  In Lesavage v. Lee,  (S.C.), the plaintiff was proceeding northbound in the curb lane on Cambie Street approaching the intersection of 13th Avenue. Traffic was backed up from the lights at 12th Avenue, but the intersection at 13th Avenue was clear of stopped cars. The defendant was travelling southbound on Cambie Street. He turned left at 13th Avenue, intending to proceed east, and struck the plaintiff's car. The defendant said he could not see into the curb lane as he approached it and that he therefore inched forward slowly while craning his neck to try and see. He knew vehicles might be in the curb lane as he started to cross it. Justice Low held that making a left turn across a flow of rush hour traffic was a difficult manoeuvre and to do so across three lanes of such traffic was considerably more difficult. The defendant proceeded with his left turn, expecting traffic to be in the curb lane, yet he entered that lane with no ability to see where approaching vehicles were. He commenced his turn abruptly and entered the curb lane without stopping. Justice Low found that when the defendant commenced his turn, the plaintiff's approaching vehicle constituted an immediate hazard. The defendant was unable to see the plaintiff's vehicle and he also knew that his vehicle would not be visible to a driver approaching in the curb lane.
38  However, Low J. found that the plaintiff, for her part, was going a little too fast for the driving situation. He held that a backup of vehicles from the traffic light at 12th Avenue was to be expected. The plaintiff was overtaking vehicles on her left and should have been aware of the possibility of northbound vehicles stopping at 13th Avenue to permit southbound vehicles to turn east. She did not see the defendant's vehicle at all. She was not keeping an adequate lookout to her left. Had she done so and at a lower speed, she might have avoided the collision or, more likely, come away with less serious physical consequences to her car and her person. She was held to be contributorily negligent to the extent of 20%.
39  I return to the evidence in this case. Although I have no doubt that Ms. Swartz sincerely tried to give her best account in her testimony, in several respects, her recollection was flawed. For example, she stated in her statement to ICBC, which was made shortly after the accident, that the plaintiff's vehicle had hit a "construction pole" which was situated in the roadway of the curb lane. She said the same thing at trial. I find that there was no such construction pole in the curb lane. The plaintiff's vehicle struck the lamp standard situated on the sidewalk a few feet north of the southwest corner of 8th Avenue and Cambie Street. Before striking that lamp standard, she also struck some of the construction scaffolding along the western side of Cambie Street between 8th Avenue and Broadway, as testified to by Ms. Adams and her son Eldon. Their recollection of that was clear. The plaintiff, not surprisingly, did not recall striking the construction scaffolding, but she certainly recalled hitting the pole against which her vehicle came to rest. The photographs make it abundantly clear that her vehicle struck a sturdy and wide pole which left a major obvious indentation in the front centre of her vehicle. The police officer, Melanie Tomlinson, testified that the vehicle was resting against the pole when she attended the scene.
40  Her evidence was inconsistent on the important question of whether she could clearly see into lane three as she approached it. On her examination for discovery, she said she had a clear and unobstructed view of lane three prior to entering it. Her statement to ICBC was similar, as she stated that she "looked down the 3rd lane of 3 to make sure it was clear for me to proceed with my left turn onto 8th Avenue when I did notice a red Honda motor vehicle coming down lane 3 of 3 going at a fast speed". It is clear to me that Ms. Swartz could not have had a clear view of lane three or else she would have seen the plaintiff's vehicle.
41  I find that the defendant was proceeding slowly through the intersection, as she crossed lanes one and two and entered lane three, the curb lane. The plaintiff was unable to estimate the speed of the defendant's vehicle as it entered lane three, but she said that the vehicle was moving and that it entered lane three "confidently". It is impossible to ascertain the speed of the defendant's vehicle as it entered the curb lane, but in the circumstances, even a slow speed would result in the sudden appearance of the defendant's vehicle in front of the plaintiff, and would account for the plaintiff's reaction in violently swerving her vehicle in order to avoid a collision.
42  I find that the defendant's vehicle entered lane three while the plaintiff's vehicle was either in the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. The plaintiff's vehicle had the right of way, and the defendant's vehicle was required to yield. Neither driver could see the other's vehicle until the point at which they almost collided. However, it was the duty of the defendant not to move into the curb lane unless the manoeuvre could be done safely, and that there was no southbound traffic in the curb lane that could result in a collision. She could not see into the curb lane and therefore, should not have proceeded into the curb lane in the circumstances. The defendant therefore was at fault for the accident and was negligent.
43  I also find that at the moment the plaintiff first was able to see the defendant's vehicle, it was not stationary, but was, in fact, moving into the plaintiff's lane of travel. If the defendant's vehicle had not been moving into the curb lane, the plaintiff, who was a reliable and careful witness, would not have been so startled by the appearance of the vehicle. The plaintiff, being surprised upon seeing the movement of the defendant's vehicle into her lane, swerved to avoid a collision. A collision between the vehicles might or might not have occurred had she not swerved. However, it was the negligence of the defendant that caused the plaintiff to swerve in order to avoid a collision, thus resulting in the accident. I do not attribute any negligence on the part of the plaintiff for responding to the situation as she did.
44  The plaintiff testified that her speed while proceeding southbound on Cambie was between 40 and 50 kph. This was within the applicable posted speed limit. I accept that she was travelling at that speed. It was not an unreasonable speed in the circumstances.
45  The defendant argues that the plaintiff was passing stopped vehicles and that had she been paying careful attention, she would have noted that there was a gap in traffic as she approached the intersection of Cambie Street and 8th Avenue. Therefore, she should have slowed down. Had she done so, the violent swerving manoeuvre that she undertook would have been unnecessary and no accident would have resulted. This is similar to the reasoning that has resulted in a finding of some contributory negligence on the part of the dominant driver in other cases: see Clark (25%); Lesavage (20%). However, it is trite law that every motor vehicle collision must be assessed on its particular facts: Walker v. Brownlee and Harmon,  (S.C.C.). The burden is on the defendant to establish contributory negligence on the part of the plaintiff.
46  I do not accept that the plaintiff was passing stopped vehicles to her left in lanes one and two. Her evidence was that they were moving, but more slowly than she was. In her statement to ICBC, Ms. Swartz said the traffic in lane one stopped first and waved her through. She then moved her vehicle slightly forward "and then lane 2 of 3 stopped". This evidence is not inconsistent with the plaintiff's evidence that the vehicles in lanes one and two were moving as she approached the intersection. I find that they were moving. This fact distinguishes this case from Clark and Lesavage.
47  I pause to note that in city driving, it is an extremely common occurrence for a driver in the curb or right hand lane to be passing slower moving vehicles to the driver's left as the driver approaches an intersection.
48  I return again to the statement of Legg J.A. in Pacheco at para 15:
Where each party's vision of the other is blocked by traffic, the dominant driver who is proceeding through the intersection is generally entitled to continue and the servient left-turning driver must yield the right of way. The existence of a left-turning vehicle does not raise a presumption that something unexpected might happen and cast a duty on the dominant driver to take extra care.
49  In order to establish liability on the part of the plaintiff, the defendant must establish that the plaintiff was aware, or by the exercise of reasonable care, should have become aware, of the defendant's disregard of the law, and that after becoming aware of the defendant's vehicle, the plaintiff had a sufficient opportunity to avoid the accident. Any doubt about this should be resolved in favour of the driver having the right of way: Walker.
50  The principle originating in Toronto Railway v. King,  at 269 (P.C.), is that:
... traffic in the streets would be impossible if the driver of each vehicle did not proceed more or less upon the assumption that the drivers of all the other vehicles will do what it is their duty to do, namely, observe the rules regulating the traffic of the streets.
51  On this basis, even momentary inattention is not sufficient to render the dominant driver negligent: Bissky v. Trottier  (S.C.), applied in Etter.
52  The question is whether in the circumstances, the plaintiff was negligent (1) in not foreseeing that the defendant's vehicle would enter her lane, contrary to the right of way the plaintiff held, and in a manner that threatened to cause an immediate serious collision, or (2) in the manner in which she responded. I find that the plaintiff was not negligent in not anticipating what, for her, was the sudden appearance of the defendant's vehicle, nor was she negligent in swerving to avoid a collision with the defendant's vehicle, resulting in the collision with the pole. I see no distinction in this respect with decisions such as Pacheco where the negligence of the defendant resulted in a collision with the defendant's vehicle. I find that the plaintiff was not contributorily negligent.
Assessment of Damages
Background
53  On the date of the accident, the plaintiff was 32 years of age. She was in good health. She and her common law spouse of 13 years, Brian King, had purchased their home in Ladner on March 14, 2006, shortly before the motor vehicle accident of June 13, 2006. Previously they had lived in an apartment in downtown Vancouver. Ms. Najdychor and her husband have no children. When they purchased the home in Ladner, they were contemplating starting a family, but had not made any firm plans in that respect.
54  Ms. Najdychor was born in Poland and immigrated to Canada in 1982 at eight years of age. After graduating from high school, she obtained a diploma in marketing management at Kwantlen College.
55  At the time, she had been employed by the Whitefish Group for just over four years. She was a retail operations manager, having responsibility for the management of five Seattle's Best Coffee cafés. She spent most of her time working in the office, but was on the road between 25 and 35% of the time. She earned a salary of <damage type = "other">$48,500</damage> per annum, and also received bonuses and benefits.
56  She was moderately active. She walked regularly and enjoyed gardening in the rooftop garden of the west end Vancouver apartment that she and her husband had resided in, prior to moving to Ladner. She also enjoyed bicycling.
57  The home in Ladner was their first home purchase. The house has four bedrooms. Her plans for landscaping and decorating of the home have been postponed due to the accident injuries.
58  The Honda Civic that she was driving at the time of the accident was equipped with a seatbelt and shoulder strap which were being worn by Ms. Najdychor at the time of the accident. As noted, the vehicle was not equipped with air bags. Her body was restrained by the shoulder strap and seatbelt. She testified that she hit her head on the steering wheel and that her knee hit the dash board. Immediately after the impact, she tried to get out of the vehicle but fell onto the ground. It is clear from the accident photos that her vehicle struck the lamp standard with a great deal of force. She suffered immediate extreme pain in her chest. A CT scan was conducted at Vancouver General Hospital. It showed a minimally displaced fracture of the sternum. She was discharged from the hospital about 2:30 a.m. the next morning and taken home by her husband.
59  Photographs taken the next day show injuries to her forehead, neck, upper chest, abdomen, upper leg, and right knee. She also sustained a cut on the forehead and a nose bleed.
60  During the first week after the accident, her husband stayed home from work to look after her. She required extensive help. Brian King testified that for the first week post-accident, Ms. Najdychor had almost no mobility. She needed help with feeding, bathing, and getting in and out of bed. Brian King testified that during the first few days, any movement caused her severe pain.
61  She saw her long-time family doctor, Dr. Morris Gordon, six days post-accident on June 19, 2006. She was using strong painkillers and was having considerable trouble moving. His examination on that date revealed significant tenderness in her mid-back and over the breast bone. She was obviously very incapacitated, according to Dr. Gordon. He made a diagnosis of soft tissue injuries as well as a fractured sternum. He prescribed pain medication and muscle relaxants. He advised her to remain off work.
62  Dr. Gordon saw her again in late June and early July. She was continuing to have considerable trouble. She complained about ringing in her ears and problems with her right temporomandibular joint, which was locking intermittently.
63  By the end of July, she was still struggling, according to Dr. Gordon. She was continuing to have decreased range of motion of her right shoulder, right trapezius muscle, and her back. She continued to have TMJ problems. She was continuing to take painkillers. A decision was made to attempt a graduated return to work program.
64  Ms. Najdychor returned to work at the Whitefish Group on August 2, 2006, approximately seven weeks post-accident.
65  She continued to see Dr. Gordon every few months. The sternum injury healed gradually, without any ongoing problems. When Dr. Gordon saw her at the end of August, she was seeing a chiropractor and physiotherapist for assistance with respect to her back and shoulder. Her right shoulder was one of her biggest problems at that time. Her dentist had sent her to see an oral surgeon with respect to her TMJ problems. She continued to struggle with problems in her shoulder, right hip, low back, and jaw.
66  In early March 2007, Dr. Gordon prescribed Trazadone, for help with depression and as a sleeping aid. At trial, the plaintiff testified that she continues to have a lot of trouble sleeping due to her injuries, but uses this medication as little as possible. By October 2007, more than a year after the accident, she was continuing to attend acupuncture, chiropractic, and massage therapy treatment. She was also engaged in an exercise program and doing yoga once a week. She was seeing a naturopathic physician in addition to Dr. Gordon.
67  Because of her slow progress, in October 2007, Dr. Gordon referred Ms. Najdychor to Dr. Henry King, an expert in musculoskeletal pain management, manual therapy, and occupational medicine. She has continued under Dr. King's treatment to the present.
68  Dr. Gordon reports that by May 2008, Ms. Najdychor told him that she was doing quite well. She was continuing to do regular exercises and was "85 percent resolved". Her main ongoing problems were right posterior hip and right shoulder pain. She was able to walk, cycle, and participate in yoga. She was still unable to sit for prolonged periods. She was continuing with acupuncture and chiropractic treatment, and continuing to have problems with her jaw.
69  Her last visit with Dr. Gordon prior to the trial was on October 15, 2008. At that time, she told him that she was continuing to improve. Her hip was doing quite well. She was still suffering from ongoing discomfort in her right shoulder blade area. The right low back was still bothering her from time to time. She continued to see Dr. King as well as to receive acupuncture and massage therapy treatment.
70  Dr. Gordon's diagnosis was of significant soft tissue injuries and a fractured sternum. She took several weeks off work which Dr. Gordon thought was totally appropriate in light of the severity of her injuries. As for prognosis, Dr. Gordon noted that Ms. Najdychor had continued to improve although she suffered from ongoing concerns. He remained hopeful that her injuries would completely resolve, but noted that this was always unpredictable. He noted that she "may be left with some mild discomfort in the future". However, she was not at risk of any severe consequences as a result of her injuries. She obtained some symptomatic benefit from chiropractic and massage therapy treatments, but Dr. Gordon was of the view that these treatments would not ultimately change the natural history of her problems. Dr. Gordon noted that Ms. Najdychor had been a very well motivated and reasonable patient throughout the course of her recovery.
71  Ms. Najdychor first saw Dr. Henry King on November 13, 2007. He has seen her on 10 occasions in total, most recently, on January 27, 2009.
72  Dr. King diagnosed a myofascial dysfunction, affecting the muscles and connective tissues of the right side of her low back and right shoulder. Although these have improved, they have not resolved and she remains vulnerable to, as Dr. King described it, the physical and emotional stresses of her lifestyle and work. Dr. King stated that Ms. Najdychor was suffering from chronic effects of strain in the areas affected by the accident, i.e. cervical and lumbar spinal, pelvic, and right shoulder griddle strains. According to Dr. King, the acute inflammatory problems resulting directly from the tissue trauma sustained in the motor vehicle accident probably mostly healed within a few months. Her persistent shoulder and back symptoms and other physical signs probably resulted from the myofascial dysfunction of the muscles and lax ligaments in the painful areas. He described "myofascial dysfunction" as abnormal muscle, ligament, and other connective tissue function that incorporates a discrete area of tenderness with an accompanying palpable abnormality in the consistency of the affected muscle and other soft tissues in or near the tender point.
73  Dr. King's therapy centred on manual manipulation and on teaching Ms. Najdychor self-treatment techniques and remedial exercises. She was advised to continue with her usual activities and postures as long as these did not provoke prolonged periods [more than six to twelve hours] of pain or stiffness.
74  Dr. King noted that Ms. Najdychor had excellent motivation and was cooperative. Her symptoms were gradually lessening in severity, but had not yet disappeared. When last assessed in January 2009, about three months before the trial, Dr. King felt that her symptoms would likely persist with decreasing severity for at least another year, and probably more. During that time, she would need to continue regular (daily) self-treatment techniques and remedial exercises, and try to remain as active as possible in activities that did not provoke prolonged pain. He thought that if the symptoms did not resolve within a few months, then further investigations such as x-rays, bone scans, or blood tests might be merited. He thought that she was not a candidate for traditional chiropractic treatment, but could still be helped by further physical therapies administered by him, a physiotherapist, or massage therapist.
75  At the request of the defendant, the plaintiff saw Dr. N.K. Reebye for an independent medical examination on July 13, 2007. Dr. Reebye's report demonstrates that he took a thorough history and preformed a thorough physical examination of Ms. Najdychor. He diagnosed the fracture of the sternum and soft tissue injuries in several areas as complained of by Ms. Najdychor. At the time of the examination, she had residual pain in the right shoulder, and mild soft tissue injuries in the areas of her neck and lower back. He noted the jaw injury. He thought the injuries would gradually improve over time, and he anticipated no permanent physical impairments or disability. He thought that while she had followed an appropriate course of treatment to the date of his examination, there was no need for further follow-up treatments. Like Dr. King, he mentioned the possibility of a bone scan if her problems in the shoulder and right hip did not resolve in due course.
76  Dr. Reebye noted that according to the plaintiff, she had gained approximately 20 pounds since the accident. She also had difficulty sleeping. She had been prescribed anti-depressant medication which made her feel foggy the next day and so she took it only on and off for awhile and had since stopped taking it.
77  Dr. Burton H. Goldstein, an expert in oral medicine and maxillofacial surgery, provided a report based upon an examination conducted September 23, 2008. He diagnosed a mild temporomandibular disorder. Dr. Goldstein's report notes that Ms. Najdychor had seen Dr. Michelle Williams, a certified specialist in oral medicine, in 2006 and 2007, who had made treatment recommendations. Dr. Goldstein thought that Ms. Najdychor had a good prognosis with appropriate management of her condition and that there was no indication of any jaw-related impairment or disability.
78  Ms. Najdychor returned to work at the Whitefish Group after an absence of seven weeks. She worked half days for one week and then returned to work full-time.
79  Soon after the accident, the nature of her work changed significantly, as her employer decided to close the five cafés that Ms. Najdychor was responsible for managing. For several months, she was involved in the process of closing down the outlets. She was transferred to a different office on West 5th Avenue in Vancouver. Her job became 100% desk work and involved working on a computer. She found it difficult to sit at a desk all day. As the nature of her duties changed, she did not enjoy her work. Her new title was Business Development Coordinator. The role did not have the same level of responsibility as she previously had and she was dissatisfied in it. She resigned her employment effective July 11, 2007.
80  She immediately began a seven week vacation in Poland with her mother.
81  She applied for employment insurance. She testified that part of her reason for resigning included the accident injuries which made it difficult for her to sit at a desk eight hours per day.
82  She was then off work for a year. On July 14, 2008, she commenced work as an Executive Assistant with the Municipality of Delta, working at the Delta Municipal Hall in Ladner, very near to her residence. She worked there first on a casual basis and then on a temporary full-time basis until September 4, 2008, when she resigned to work elsewhere. She then took a job with the B.C. Lottery Corporation working at its offices in Richmond as a sales facilities coordinator, commencing September 8, 2008. The position was described as "temporary" and extending until March 31, 2009 with possible extension or reduction as required. The pay was <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage> per annum, with a bonus program.
83  Ms. Najdychor resigned from the B.C. Lottery Corporation position effective October 17, 2008, after only six weeks of employment. She informed her employer that she was unable to do the amount of driving that was required in the role, as a result of her back injury. She resumed work immediately thereafter at the Municipality of Delta, on a temporary full-time assignment which ended April 3, 2009. She returned to work as a part-time auxiliary on-call employee on April 21, 2009, but this work is expected to end in June 2009.
84  Ms. Najdychor does not claim for wage loss with respect to the one year period from the time of her resignation from Whitefish Group on July 11, 2007, and prior to commencing work with the Municipality of Delta on July 14, 2008. She claims for wage loss for the seven week period immediately following the accident, and for further wage loss following her resignation from the B.C. Lottery Corporation, to the date of trial, and for future loss of earnings.
Analysis
85  The plaintiff claims as follows:
Non-pecuniary loss: <damage type = "other">$65,000</damage>;
Special damages: <damage type = "other">$6,705.98</damage>;
Cost of future care: <damage type = "other">$3,850.85</damage>;
Past income loss: <damage type = "other">$11,205.56</damage>;
Future income loss: <damage type = "other">$37,230.08</damage>.
86  She also makes an in-trust claim for the benefit of her common law spouse in the amount of <damage type = "other">$1,847.62</damage> for his lost income while he cared for her after the accident.
87  The position of the defendant is as follows:
Non-pecuniary loss: <damage type = "other">$25,000-$35,000</damage>;
Special damages: <damage type = "other">$2,358.48</damage>;
Cost of future care: nil;
Past income loss: <damage type = "other">$4,203.91</damage>;
Future income loss: nil.
88  The defendant also says that general damages should be reduced by 10 to 20% as a result of the plaintiff's failure to mitigate. The defence alleges that Ms. Najdychor attended with Dr. King inconsistently and did not adequately carry out his instructions for self help exercises. She delayed unreasonably in undertaking treatment for her TMJ condition.
Non-pecuniary Damages
89  The purpose of an award of non-pecuniary damages is to ameliorate the condition of the victim considering his or her particular situation. The gravity of the injury is not determinative. An appreciation of the individual's loss is the key, and the award will vary in each case to meet the specific circumstances of the individual case: Stapley v. Hejslet, ,  at para. 45. As set out in Stapley at para. 46, common factors include the age of the plaintiff, the nature of the injury, severity and duration of pain, disability, emotional suffering, and loss or impairment of life. Additional factors may be impairment of family, marital and social relationships, impairment of physical and mental abilities, loss of lifestyle, and the plaintiff's stoicism, in the sense that stoicism should not penalize the plaintiff.
90  Although every case is unique, and the award must reflect the circumstances as they relate to the plaintiff, other decisions of the courts provide useful guidance.
91  The plaintiff suffered a fractured sternum and serious soft tissue injuries which were, initially, completely disabling. She returned to work seven weeks post-accident, working part-time for the first week. It is now nearly three years post-accident and the plaintiff continues to suffer from pain in her right hip and low back area, right shoulder pain, and jaw. Her major ongoing complaint regards sitting for prolonged periods of time, including at a desk, or when driving.
92  Ms. Najdychor has made a sincere and conscientious effort to recover. In her zeal to get better, she has undertaken much treatment. However I do not find that the treatment she has undertaken was unreasonable.
93  She obtained relief with the aid of Dr. Henry King. He noted that she had to be taught and re-taught the self-help treatments that he prescribed for her. However, he noted that this kind of pattern was not unusual in cases such as this. Patients tend to get discouraged. In my view, the plaintiff has adhered to and performed the self-treatment techniques taught by Dr. King and adhered to all of the medical advice that she has received to the best of her ability, with one exception.
94  The exception is with respect to the treatment of her TMJ problem. In late 2006, Dr. Michelle Williams recommended that Ms. Najdychor wear a dental splint (occlusal appliance) overnight. At trial, she testified that she did not follow that advice until earlier this year, due to two factors: the cost of the splint, which was <damage type = "other">$700</damage>, and the fact that her TMJ problem was a relatively minor one compared to her other injuries, and that she preferred to focus on those other injuries. The plaintiff is now using the dental splint appliance at night. It is an uncomfortable device involving both the upper and lower jaw. She cannot speak when wearing it. She finds that she is obtaining some improvement in her condition through the use of the appliance.
95  There is a clear failure to mitigate on the part of the plaintiff with respect to her delay in purchasing and utilizing the dental splint. However, the TMJ problem is, as the plaintiff indicated, one of her more minor concerns.
96  I accept that the plaintiff's complaints as noted in the medical reports and as testified to at trial are genuine, and that they have interfered with her normal activities and lifestyle to a significant degree. She has gradually made a good recovery although she is not yet symptom-free. She continues to have pain and limitation of function. She continues to suffer from problems sleeping. She has gained approximately 20 to 25 pounds since the accident and as a result of lack of physical activity. Her husband testified that her injuries have significantly interfered with their marriage, and I accept that evidence.
97  When she saw her general practitioner, Dr. Morris Gordon, in May of 2008, she said she was 85% resolved. She has continued to improve since that time. Dr. Gordon remains hopeful that her injuries will completely resolve, but as he said, this is always unpredictable and she may be left with some mild discomfort in future. In his report based upon his examination of July 13, 2007, Dr. Reebye also made a prognosis for gradual improvement over time. He acknowledged that it was possible that her symptoms could persist for a long time, which they clearly have. Finally, Dr. King thought her symptoms would likely persist with decreasing severity for at least another year and probably more, from the date he last saw her, which was January 27, 2009.
98  There was some difference of medical opinion with respect to the question of future medical treatment. Dr. Gordon, thought that chiropractic and/or massage therapy treatments provided symptomatic benefits, but would not ultimately change the natural history of her condition. Dr. Reebye was of the view that there was no need for further treatments as his examination on July 13, 2007, although he allowed for the possibility of continuing problems including further investigation and treatment if required. Dr. King thought that she "may be helped" by further physical-type therapies such as those administered by himself or others.
99  The overall prognosis is therefore very optimistic. Ms. Najdychor is now almost completely recovered and her recovery will continue. She is likely to completely recover at some point in time in the future. I accept the opinion of Dr. King that her symptoms will persist for another year and probably more. Her current symptoms are quite mild.
100  In support of her submission of a non-pecuniary award of <damage type = "other">$65,000</damage>, the plaintiff referred me to the following authorities: Perren v. Lalari, ; Ufimzeff v. Brown, ; Higgerty v. Hazell, ; Locki v. Anderson,  (S.C.); and Atwater v. Reese, . In these cases, the award of non-pecuniary loss ranged from <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage> (Perren, Ufimzeff and Atwater) to $70,000 (Higgerty). The defence referred me to Job v. Van Blankers,  (<damage type = "other">$25,000</damage>, prior to reduction of 10% for failure to mitigate), and Guilbault v. Purser,  (<damage type = "other">$35,000</damage>).
101  In Perren, the plaintiff suffered neck and low back soft tissue injuries in an accident that occurred 44 months prior to the trial. At the time of the accident, she had one infant daughter. Shortly after the accident, she became pregnant with her second child. She was off work for one to two months post-accident. The Court accepted that she was at risk of premature arthritis in her cervical spine and left shoulder. The Court was satisfied that she had chronic pain associated with her soft tissue injuries and that her pain and discomfort would continue indefinitely. After reviewing the authorities, Macaulay J. determined that the award for non-pecuniary loss should be <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage>, including loss of general homemaking capacity.
102  In Ufimzeff, the plaintiff was a 63 year old woman who worked on a family farm. She suffered a moderate soft tissue injury to her back and a fracture to her sternum. As a result of her injuries, she was entirely unable to perform the physical labours associated with the operation of the family farm for approximately six months and the injuries continued to substantially impair her abilities in that regard, and so the farm was sold about a year after the accident. Her injuries continued to limit her activities at the time of trial three years post-accident, and would likely continue in future, although they would be moderate. The award of non-pecuniary damages was <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage>.
103  In Higgerty, the plaintiff was a female who was 41 years of age at the time of the trial in 2000, approximately four years post-accident. She suffered from sternum and chest wall injuries, soft tissue injuries to the neck, upper back, mid back, and lower back, and bruising, a fractured left toe, headaches, post traumatic stress disorder, anxiety and depression. As of the date of trial, she continued to complain of her injuries. The Court held that her pain and discomfort had only gradually improved with a combination of time, physiotherapy and exercise, and that her condition had plateaued, such that any further recovery would be limited and very gradual. The non-pecuniary loss award was <damage type = "other">$70,000</damage>.
104  In Locki, the accident took place in 1989 and the trial was in 1992. The plaintiff was 62 years of age at the time of the trial. She suffered from a dislocation of the right ankle, a fracture of the right wrist, a fractured sternum, and other minor injuries. The most serious injuries were to her ankle and wrist. She was in hospital for 23 days. <damage type = "other">$60,000</damage> was awarded for non-pecuniary loss. However, the decision is now quite dated and in any event, is not sufficiently comparable to be of much assistance.
105  In Atwater, the plaintiff was 24 years of age at the time of trial in 2009, approximately two and three-quarter years post-accident. Justice Macaulay held that the plaintiff had sustained a lower moderate soft tissue injury which resulted in chronic pain and mild anxiety. At the time of trial, she was suffering from chronic pain, but her condition was amenable to improvement provided she increased her tolerance for recreational activity. <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage> was awarded for non-pecuniary loss.
106  In Job (cited by the defence), the plaintiff was a 29 year old female at the time of the collision, approximately one year prior to the trial. The Court held that at best, the evidence established a mild to moderate soft tissue injury to the plaintiff's neck, back and shoulders. She suffered from tingling in her left arm, headaches, discomfort when sitting or standing for any length of time, and an inability to lift objects or perform some domestic chores, without experiencing some onset of pain. The injuries had not fully resolved as at the time of trial. Non-pecuniary losses were assessed at <damage type = "other">$25,000</damage> less 10% for failure to mitigate, as the plaintiff had failed to follow through on her doctor's referrals.
107  The other case cited by the defence is Guilbault. The accident occurred four and a half years pre-trial. Justice Blair held that the plaintiff suffered soft tissue injuries to her neck, shoulder and right hip. The right hip complaint was an exacerbation of a pre-existing condition. The plaintiff also suffered from particularly distressing headaches. By the time of trial, the complaints emanating from the accident were largely resolved, although the plaintiff continued to suffer from occasional headaches and some neck pain. Her injuries affected her physical capabilities over the four and a half years prior to the accident and would continue to do so to some degree into the future. The Court held that the plaintiff had enjoyed a particularly active lifestyle and therefore, her injuries would have a greater impact upon her than they would upon someone whose lifestyle was more sedentary. <damage type = "other">$35,000</damage> was awarded.
108  Having regard to all of the factors set out in Stapley, and the other authorities to which I was referred, in my view, an appropriate award for non-pecuniary loss in this case is <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$60,000</damage>.
109  There has been a failure to mitigate with respect to treatment for the TMJ complaint, which is a minor part of Ms. Najdychor's overall complaints. There will be a reduction of <damage type = "reduction by">$1,000</damage> on the ground of failure to mitigate with respect to this one complaint.
Special damages
110  The plaintiff has incurred out-of-pocket expenses in the amount of <damage type = "other">$6,705.98</damage> and claims for reimbursement of that amount. The defence says that the expenses incurred after July 13, 2007 when the plaintiff saw Dr. Reebye are unnecessary and should not be allowed.
111  In my opinion, while the plaintiff has undertaken much treatment for her injuries, none of the treatment was unreasonable, and the defendant benefits from her favourable prognosis. The special damages amount claimed is reasonable and will be allowed in full.
Cost of future care
112  Dr. Gordon was of the view that further treatment would not change the natural history of her problems, but may provide relief of symptoms. Dr. King was also of the view that Ms. Najdychor "may be helped" by further physical-type therapies administered by him, a physiotherapist, or a massage therapist. Treatment by Dr. King has been beneficial in the past. The cost is covered by the Medical Services Plan. I note that there is no claim for the cost of treatment by Dr. King in the plaintiff's special damages claims. In my view, if there is any need for future treatment, which is doubtful on the evidence, the plaintiff should continue to obtain that treatment from Dr. King, who has rendered capable and effective care in the past. On this basis, no award is warranted for cost of future care.
Past income loss
113  The plaintiff claims for the loss of the sum of <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">$5,267.42 for the seven weeks that she was away from work following the motor vehicle accident. This sum will be allowed.
114  The plaintiff claims a further sum of <damage type = "other">$5,938.34</damage> based upon the difference between the income that she would have received had she stayed employed with BC Lottery Corporation ("BCLC") and the income she did receive at the Municipality of Delta. The plaintiff alleges that the nature of the BCLC work prevented her from continuing in that occupation and that she was forced to seek other work such as with the Municipality of Delta, where there was little driving involved.
115  The defence position is that Ms. Najdychor could have stayed at her Whitefish Group job, and that in any event, the evidence does not support a claim for past wage loss beyond the initial seven week period following the accident.
116  Mr. Cory Baran is a sales manager with BCLC. He testified that the head office of BCLC is in Kamloops. It has offices in Richmond as well, which is where he is stationed. The plaintiff was hired to work out of the Richmond offices. BCLC has 600 to 700 employees. Its operations cover gaming in British Columbia including lotteries, casinos, and bingo. Mr. Baran was Ms. Najdychor's second supervisor at BCLC. She was initially hired to work under Mr. Troy Faye, but due to the nature of the work, Ms. Najdychor was transferred to Mr. Baran's supervision.
117  Mr. Baran confirmed that Ms. Najdychor's work at the BCLC involved a lot of travel by car. He confirmed that her work was essentially that of a "jobber". She would travel to pubs, bars, casinos and bingo halls to ensure that these locations were adequately stocked with BCLC's products and promotional materials. The majority of her work was at these sites. Mr. Baran thought that the physical demands of the job were moderate. Her territory was province-wide. She would work independently, and would need to drive for the work. He wanted someone to do this work so that his sales and territory managers would not have to take up their valuable time doing it.
118  Although Ms. Najdychor was hired as a temporary worker with a fixed end date of March 31, 2009, there were good prospects that the job would develop into a full-time position. Mr. Baran had no problem with her performance on the job.
119  Dr. King's advice is that the plaintiff should remain as active as possible as long as her activities do not cause prolonged pain. I accept the plaintiff's evidence that driving for extended periods of time continue to cause her pain. Based upon the medical advice of Dr. King, excessive driving continues to be contra-indicated. I accept the plaintiff's evidence that she resigned from the BCLC job because she could not do it. I accept that had she continued to do it, the job would have been detrimental to her recovery. Her inability to carry on with the BCLC job resulted from the accident injuries. The fact that she might have made different decisions and stayed at Whitefish Group is immaterial. I therefore accept that the plaintiff has suffered a past income loss in the amount claimed, for the period following her resignation from BCLC to April 21, 2009, in the amount of <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">$5,939.34</damage>.
120  The total amount of past wage loss to be allowed is <damage type = "past wage loss">$11,206.76</damage>.
Future income loss
121  The plaintiff claims for future income loss of <damage type = "other">$38,672.64</damage>, based upon the theory that she will continue to have a loss of earnings or loss of earning capacity for three years, and that the sum of <damage type = "other">$38,672.64</damage> represents the difference between what she could have earned had she stayed at the BCLC, and what she presently earns at the Municipality of Delta.
122  The plaintiff has now almost completely recovered. I accept that she has some minimal ongoing restrictions, including an inability to drive for extended periods of time. However, she is otherwise unrestricted in terms of work capacity. Her condition is likely to continue to improve.
123  I accept that she continues to suffer some minor loss of earning capacity, based upon the factors set out in Brown v. Golaiy  (S.C.). I do not accept that the amount as calculated by the plaintiff represents an appropriate measure of the loss of earning capacity. The salary that she would have had at BCLC is <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage>, and there was a potential for a bonus of up to 11.25% of salary. In my view, <damage type = "future wage loss">$20,000</damage> represents an appropriate award for the earning capacity restriction that the plaintiff has suffered. This represents something slightly more than a third of the annual gross pay that she could have earned at BCLC, or in other words, is equivalent to roughly four months of full-time pay at the position she was forced to leave.
In-trust claim - common-law husband Brian King
124  At the time of the accident, Ms. Najdychor's common-law husband, Brian King, was self-employed as a painting and decorating contractor. He said his business was very busy at that time. He has a crew of four to eight workers. His personal charge-out rate in 2006 was <damage type = "other">$50</damage> per hour. Immediately after the accident, he stayed home to care for his wife, for a week. The charge-out rate for his experienced workers was then <damage type = "other">$22</damage> to <damage type = "other">$25</damage> per hour, and a helper would be charged out at <damage type = "other">$15</damage> to <damage type = "other">$17</damage> per hour.
125  Mr. King testified that when he is on the job site, the work can move from 20 to 50% faster, because he himself is a very efficient worker and he, being the boss, is on site to make sure the work is carried out quickly. His profitability is based upon how quickly he can do the work.
126  The defence argued that Mr. King should have employed temporary help in his business, or Ms. Najdychor ought to have employed homecare, rather than having Mr. King suffer a loss in his business as claimed. These alternatives are impractical. In any event, some in-trust or special damages claims would have resulted.
127  I am satisfied that the in-trust claim is appropriate, and that Mr. King suffered a real loss of business and income as a result of the need for him to stay at home to look after his wife for a week after the accident. Estimating the loss is difficult and of necessity an imprecise exercise. The plaintiff has estimated the value of Mr. King's daily income at <damage type = "other">$360</damage>. This is a reasonable and indeed modest estimate. The in-trust claim will be allowed in the sum of <damage type = "in trust">$1,800</damage>, based upon the loss of five working days.
Summary of conclusions
128  The plaintiff will receive compensation from the defendants as follows:
Non-pecuniary loss: <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$59,000</damage>
(<damage type = "non-pecuniary">$60,000</damage> less <damage type = "reduction by">$1,000</damage> for failure to mitigate);
Special damages <damage type = "special">$6,705.98</damage>;
Cost of future care: nil;
Past income loss: <damage type = "past wage loss">$11,206.76</damage>;
Loss of earning capacity: <damage type = "future wage loss">$20,000</damage>;
In-trust claim: <damage type = "in trust">$1,800</damage>;
TOTAL: <damage type = "total">$98,712.74</damage>
129  The plaintiff will have party and party costs at Scale B subject to submissions of the parties. The parties will be at liberty to make submissions with respect to costs within 30 days of the date of judgment.
F.E. VERHOEVEN J.
End of Document
Delgiglio v. Becker, [2012] B.C.J. No. 650
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
New Westminster, British Columbia
J.M. Gropper J.
Heard: November 28-30 and December 5-7, 2011.
Judgment: April 2, 2012.
Docket: M119014
Registry: New Westminster
[2012] B.C.J. No. 650   |   2012 BCSC 480
Between Antonino Delgiglio, Plaintiff, and Melissa R. Becker and Minister of Public Safety and Solicitor General of British Columbia, Defendants
(122 paras.)
[Editor's note: Supplementary reasons for judgment were released May 31, 2012. See .]
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Body injuries — Back and spine — Considerations impacting on award — Pre-existing injury — Action by Delgiglio for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident allowed — The defendant Becker, an RCMP officer, drove her police cruiser through a red light and struck Delgiglio's vehicle — She submitted that her brakes did not work — Becker took no steps to avoid the collision — No mechanical defect was found — Becker was negligent and the defendants were liable — Delgiglio suffered a re-aggravation of a neck and lower back injury — The injuries had a significant impact on his life — Delgiglio was awarded $331,868 in damages.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Considerations — Aggravation of pre-existing injury — Pre-existing medical conditions — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Retroactive loss of income — Special damages — Non-pecuniary loss — Action by Delgiglio for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident allowed — The defendant Becker, an RCMP officer, drove her police cruiser through a red light and struck Delgiglio's vehicle — She submitted that her brakes did not work — Becker took no steps to avoid the collision — No mechanical defect was found — Becker was negligent and the defendants were liable — Delgiglio suffered a re-aggravation of a neck and lower back injury — The injuries had a significant impact on his life — Delgiglio was awarded $331,868 in damages.
Tort law — Negligence — Motor vehicles — Action by Delgiglio for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident allowed — The defendant Becker, an RCMP officer, drove her police cruiser through a red light and struck Delgiglio's vehicle — She submitted that her brakes did not work — Becker took no steps to avoid the collision — No mechanical defect was found — Becker was negligent and the defendants were liable — Delgiglio suffered a re-aggravation of a neck and lower back injury — The injuries had a significant impact on his life — Delgiglio was awarded <damage type = "total">$331,868</damage> in damages.
Action by Delgiglio for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident. In 2009, the defendant Becker, an RCMP officer, drove her police cruiser through a red light and struck Delgiglio's vehicle. Becker submitted that she attempted to stop her cruiser but the brakes did not work. The defendants took the position that Becker was driving with reasonable care and was not negligent or liable for any damage suffered by Delgiglio. Delgiglio took the position that Becker did nothing to avoid the accident and was therefore negligent and caused the accident. Delgiglio had pre-existing medical conditions and had been in previous motor vehicle accidents. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 Becker took no steps to avoid the collision or to warn Delgiglio that she could not stop. No mechanical defect or malfunction was found when the cruiser was examined. Becker was therefore negligent and the defendants were liable for the accident. By the time of the 2009 accident, Delgiglio had returned to work full-time and had returned to his baseline level of pain since his previous accident. The injuries from the previous accident were divisible from those sustained in the 2009 accident. Delgiglio suffered a re-aggravation of a neck and lower back injury and had reached a plateau in his recovery. The injuries had a significant impact on his life and he was now unfit to pursue his career in truck driving. Delgiglio was awarded <damage type = "total">$331,868</damage> in damages, which included <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$80,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages, <damage type = "past wage loss">$74,291</damage> for past wage loss, <damage type = "future wage loss">$150,000</damage> for loss of future earning capacity, <damage type = "future care">$25,000</damage> for the cost of future care and <damage type = "special">$2,577</damage> in special damages.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Insurance (Vehicle) Act, R.S.B.C. 1966, c. 231, s. 98
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: J.D. Boyd.
Counsel for the Defendants: S.J. Eustace, T.E. Fairgrieve.
Reasons for Judgment
J.M. GROPPER J.
Introduction
1  On January 6, 2009, Mr. Del Giglio was on his way home from work at approximately 1:30 a.m. He was driving his 2002 Chevy Silverado truck north on Clarke Road toward the intersection at Smith Street in Coquitlam, British Columbia. He had a green light.
2  Constable Melissa Becker was driving her RCMP police cruiser travelling west on Smith Street. Although she faced a red light, she went through the intersection without stopping and hit the plaintiff's vehicle. Liability is in dispute.
3  Mr. Del Giglio asserts that he suffered injuries because of the accident and claims non-pecuniary damages, past loss of income, future loss of earning capacity, costs of future care and special damages.
Liability
4  Although Constable Becker went through a red light, she maintains that the plaintiff has not proven that she is liable for the accident.
5  Constable Becker says that she was on her way to a restaurant on her lunch break during her shift at around 1:30 a.m. on January 6, 2009. She was going with her partner, Constable Farwaha who was immediately behind her in his police cruiser.
6  Constable Becker says Clarke Road and Smith Street were both plowed. It was not raining. The temperature was about zero. She had driven Clarke Road and Smith Street earlier in the evening and had no difficulty driving. She drove from the police station half a block east of the Clarke and Smith intersection and as she turned onto Smith, she says she noticed that the light at the intersection was red. She used her brakes to slow down and it was her intention to come to a full stop. She says she put her foot on the brake but her cruiser was not slowing down or stopping as she expected. She thought that she was sliding although she was going straight. She says it did not feel like she was on black ice.
7  Constable Becker says she was travelling at a very low speed although she was not keeping track. She took her foot off the gas and when she got to the left-hand turn lane before the intersection, she applied her brake. She kept both feet on the brake pedal and pressed as hard as she could. She says the cruiser seemed to slow down with gravity and she thought it would come to a complete stop at the intersection. She estimates that she attempted to stop her cruiser when it was about 150 feet before the intersection at Clarke Road and slid for about 30 seconds. She saw Mr. Del Giglio's truck either coming into or in the intersection. After she saw the truck, she looked down at her feet on the brake. She hoped that the brakes would start to work. She says she was convinced that the cruiser would stop before the intersection.
8  Constable Becker considered that her ABS brake system was not working. She says that when she realized that she radioed her partner to say that she could not stop. She saw Mr. Del Giglio's truck northbound on Clark. She put on her seatbelt and the emergency lights. She says that the cruiser did not stop. Her cruiser stopped as she and the plaintiff's vehicle collided. She did not recall feeling a jerk.
9  Constable Becker says that she did not think of steering to the right or left to attempt to avoid the plaintiff's vehicle. She did not try to shift gears; she did not engage the emergency brake; she did not sound the siren or honk the horn.
10  Mr. Del Giglio says that he was driving north on Clarke Road. The road was wet but not slippery; there was snow and slush at the side of the road. He says he was driving under the speed limit. As he approached the intersection, he had a green light. He says when he was in the intersection the police cruiser went through the red light and "t-boned" his truck. It spun it around until it was facing eastbound. He says that the cruiser ended up in the oncoming lane of traffic (south of the intersection). Mr. Del Giglio says that at the last second he swerved left when he realized the cruiser was going to hit his vehicle. It was too late.
11  Following the accident Constable Becker went to the plaintiff's vehicle to talk to him. She did not inspect the intersection. She walked back up the left turn lane she had previously driven on Smith Street to another police cruiser. She did not have any difficulty walking and did not observe any black ice.
12  The defence called evidence that the cruiser was serviced regularly. There was no mechanical defect or malfunction of the brakes observed when the cruiser was inspected after the accident.
Position of the Parties
13  Mr. Del Giglio maintains that Constable Becker was negligent and caused the accident. Even though she says that she was travelling at a very low speed, her cruiser slid over 150 feet through a red light, into the intersection where it collided with Mr. Del Giglio's truck.
14  Mr. Del Giglio says that Constable Becker did not do anything to avoid the accident. She did not pump or release her brakes, steer out of the slide, drive into the adjacent lane or to the curb, change gears, or make any attempt to regain control of the vehicle. She did not sound the siren or the horn.
15  Mr. Del Giglio observes that Constable Becker did not say that she had encountered black ice. She did not have any difficulty walking back up the left-turn lane that her cruiser had travelled when she could not stop. If she maintains that the road was slippery, her partner, Constable Farwaha, could have corroborated her evidence but he was not called to give evidence. He asserts that an adverse inference should be drawn from the defendants' failure to call Constable Farwaha.
16  The defendants assert that Constable Becker was driving with reasonable care and is not liable and negligent for any damage suffered by the plaintiff. The defendants say that merely because a motor vehicle accident has occurred, it does not necessarily follow that negligence is involved: Goodwin v. Goodwin et al,  at para 30. Relying on Nason v. Nunes,  at para. 14, the defendants assert that because Constable Becker has shown that she drove with reasonable care she cannot be found liable for the accident, even if she is not able to explain how it happened.
17  The defendants argue that the circumstances in the early morning hours of January 6, 2009, were those of poor road and weather conditions. In that context, they argue, Constable Becker took all reasonable precautions and did not depart from a reasonable standard of care. The precautions that she took included driving at a very low speed, applying the brakes and continuing to step firmly on them so that the cruiser's anti-lock braking system would effectively stop her vehicle, advising her partner that she could not stop, buckling her seatbelt and activating the emergency lights. Constable Becker's trust in her anti-lock braking system was reasonable and it was reasonable for her to believe that she would stop before she went into the intersection.
Discussion
18  The defendants rely on a series of cases where the court declined to find liability where the defendant demonstrated that his or her driving was reasonable, but because of icy conditions, was unable to control the vehicle, which slid out of control. The principle was discussed in Nason at para. 14:
Wherever the court finds on all the evidence that negligence has not been proven, or that the defendant has shown he drove with reasonable care, the defendant must succeed, whether or not he is able to "explain" how the accident occurred. This is not to suggest that an inference may not be drawn as a matter of fact in a particular case, where a vehicle leaves the road or a driver loses control; but as the trial judge states ... such an inference will be "highly dependent on the facts" of the case and the explanation required to rebut it will "vary in accordance with the strength of the inference sought to be drawn by the plaintiff."
[emphasis in original]
19  In Bhangal v. Sloan, , the court confirmed a jury award which found no negligence on the defendant's part, after hearing his evidence about what he did where the road was icy and he could not stop. The defendant in that case checked his brakes three times before he came to the stop sign, did not drive over 20 kilometres an hour, kept pumping the brakes, honked his horn, flashed his high and low beams, put his hazard lights on, tried to steer into the ditch, tried to put the gear in reverse and applied his emergency break.
20  Constable Becker's evidence did not confirm that the road conditions were icy or slippery; she specifically said that she did not consider that she was slipping on black ice and had no difficulty walking up the left-turn lane which she had earlier driven in her police cruiser. Her faith in her braking system was not sufficient to avoid a collision. Constable Becker did not take any steps to avoid travelling through the intersection on a red light or colliding with the plaintiff's vehicle. She did not take any steps to warn the plaintiff that she could not stop. Putting on her seatbelt and radioing her partner are unhelpful in warning Mr. Del Giglio that she would be entering the intersection on a red light. Putting on her emergency lights may have alerted Mr. Del Giglio to her cruiser but would not warn him that she could not stop.
21  Constable Becker says that her anti-lock braking system was not effective in stopping the cruiser. I cannot accept that evidence in light of the defendants' other evidence from the detachment's fleet mechanic, Gerald Brown, that no mechanical defect or malfunction of the brakes was found when the cruiser was examined after the accident. Constable Becker's explanations of the cause of her going through the red light are not based on the evidence, neither her own or that of Mr. Brown.
22  Constable Becker's reaction, when she saw Mr. Del Giglio's truck entering or in the intersection, was not reasonable; she did nothing that would avoid the collision. It is unnecessary to draw an adverse inference from the defendant's failure to call Constable Farwaha as a witness. The defendants' own evidence is sufficient to disprove Constable Becker's explanation of how the accident occurred.
23  I have no hesitation in determining that Constable Becker was negligent and the defendants are therefore liable for the motor vehicle accident.
24  The defendants also assert that the plaintiff's failure to stop his own vehicle in the circumstances fell below the standard of a reasonable driver and constitute negligence. Mr. Del Giglio says that he accelerated or perhaps he braked; he did what he could to avoid Constable Becker's cruiser when, seconds before the impact, it appeared that she was not stopping at the red light. I cannot conclude that the plaintiff was contributorily negligent in the circumstances.
The Evidence
Before the accident
Health
25  Mr. Del Giglio is presently 57 years of age. He has a checkered medical history, complicated by seven motor vehicle accidents before that of January 6, 2009.
26  Mr. Del Giglio also has degenerative back conditions including diffused idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH Syndrome) and degenerative disc disease. He has lymphedema in his lower right leg, which requires him to wear a leg brace, and a meniscus tear to his left knee. He is obese and de-conditioned. He has severe sleep apnea which he manages with a sleep mask.
27  On April 24, 1988, Mr. Del Giglio was rear-ended while he was stopped at a red light in Maple Ridge. He suffered injuries to his back and neck. As a result of this he had a lumbar fusion in 1991. Mr. Del Giglio had an improvement in his level of pain after the surgery but was left with persistent back symptomology.
28  Mr. Del Giglio commenced an action in respect of the 1988 accident. Judgment was rendered by Mr. Justice Boyle on June 10, 1993. The decision is indexed as . Damages for non pecuniary loss were assessed at <damage type = "other">$70,000</damage>.
29  The dates of the other motor vehicle accidents are July 30, 1997, February 9, 1999, June 21, 2002, November 6, 2002, January 30, 2003 and May 26, 2008. Those accidents were minor rear-end collisions which resulted in a temporary aggravation of neck and back pain. Mr. Del Giglio says that after each he returned to his post 1988 pain baseline level.
30  The May 2008 accident caused a strain to Mr. Del Giglio's lumbar spine and to his neck. When he saw his family physician, Dr. Brian Monk, on November 25, 2008, he complained of some back pain after a day's work, but he was able to work full time. Dr. Monks treated Mr. Del Giglio for the injuries sustained in the May 2008 accident. He felt that accident caused low back strain and aggravation of a pre-existing degenerative disc disease. In his evidence, Dr. Monks says when he asked Mr. Del Giglio what his state of recovery was from the May 2008 accident, Mr. Del Giglio said that he was 90% recovered from this accident and back to work as a truck driver when he was involved in a subsequent collision on January 6, 2009.
Work
31  Mr. Del Giglio has worked steadily since he left high school. From 1972 to 1974 he worked with the BC Forest Service. In 1974 he began work as a truck driver with CP Transportation doing bulk and heavy haul. From 1978 until 1988 he was steadily employed by Arrow Transport Ltd. By 1988 he was earning approximately <damage type = "other">$70,000</damage> per year.
32  The 1988 accident prevented him from returning to his previous work as a long haul truck driver. He could not lift as he had before or tolerate prolonged periods of sitting. He was sensitive to rough rides in a poorly suspended vehicle.
33  Boyle J. assessed his past wage loss at <damage type = "other">$286,000</damage>, pension loss at $46,400 and future wage loss at <damage type = "other">$421,940</damage>. He determined that Mr. Del Giglio was not totally disabled from work and applied a 25% contingency. His conclusion in regard to future wage loss is stated at paras. 151-152 and 156-158:
No one disputes the Plaintiff had a phenomenal work record. He worked every hour he could get. He took virtually no time off. He was censured for certain lack of professional care on a few occasions but I did not conclude these were relevant to past or future wage loss. He was about mid-way on the seniority list and member of a strong union. If he returned, he would retain that seniority.
There are lighter, local, four-days-on/ four-days-off jobs at the trucking firm (Gunn evidence). They are not as high paying as the Seattle run and they are not free of loading and unloading but some delivery points have hydraulic aids. It seemed to me the Plaintiff did not give a job of this kind his best shot.
...
Nevertheless, assessing past loss of income, some deduction must be made to signal the conclusion that the Plaintiff has not come to grips with the fact of long term persistence of symptomatology that will have to be borne bravely. That is to say, he should have mitigated his losses by pursuit of employment at a level of tolerable activity. He has not done that in a practical way. He should have turned to his union for advice and help. I was not convinced that local light truck driving was beyond his physical reach. His evidence of contact with his former employer and of a gravel truck ride to test his back, did not seem to me to cover all potential opportunities nor to be more than perfunctory.
Had he diligently sought retraining, it would be fair to say there should be no negative contingency but he did not. The Plaintiff did not do well in school. I do not know why not. His evidence sounded to be that of an intelligent, articulate person. His spacial and mechanical reasoning ability was found by occupational consultant, William R. Kelley, to be in the top one-third of men.
34  Of the <damage type = "other">$65,000</damage> per year that he had earned, Boyle J. determined that his loss was <damage type = "other">$29,000</damage> annually, calculated to age 65 for its present value. He applied a 20% deduction for contingencies on the award for future loss of earnings.
35  As he recovered from his injuries from the 1988 accident, Mr. Del Giglio began playing guitar. In the spring of 1991 he joined a band or performed as a freelance guitarist. In 1996 he began to play lead guitar with the Ken McCoy Band The band plays locally and occasionally travels. They were playing three to four nights a week in the late 90's, but now the band plays one to three nights a week,
36  In October 2005, Mr. Del Giglio took a job at J.D.P. Holdings. The work involved driving short haul and required no significant lifting or carrying. The trucks operated by J.D.P. are relatively new and have better suspension than the trucks he operated before 1988.
37  Mr. Del Giglio worked a regular afternoon shift. His job provided flexible hours and accommodated his music career. Mr. Del Giglio says that he missed three months of work from J.D.P. Holdings as a result of his May 2008 accident. He returned to work full-time and to his full-time regular duties at the beginning of September 2008 and was working on that basis when the January 2009 accident occurred.
The Accident
38  The impact to Mr. Del Giglio's vehicle in the accident was to the passenger door and down the side of the vehicle to the rear tire. The cost of repairs was over <damage type = "other">$8,200</damage>.
39  Mr. Del Giglio says that shortly after the accident he began to feel a burning sensation in his lower back, pain in his neck and a headache. Mr. Del Giglio also injured his right elbow and right hand.
After the Accident
40  Mr. Del Giglio went to see Dr. Monks on the day of the accident. Dr. Monks observed that Mr. Del Giglio's lower para-dorsal muscles were very tender on palpation and he complained of significant pain with weight rotation. Dr. Monks diagnosed a strain to his lumbar spine and to his neck. He advised Tylenol and Advil for pain and inflammation and referred Mr. Del Giglio to physiotherapy.
41  The hand pain lasted two weeks and the elbow pain resolved around the same time. Dr. Monks' reports describe Mr. Del Giglio's ongoing pain and restriction of movement in his back which continues. Mr. De Giglio says he suffers from headaches which started shortly after the accident. They arise from his neck injury. He has taken pain killers and anti-inflammatory medication to treat the headaches. The pain varies in strength. He gets them four to ten times a month and can last as long as a day. He says he also suffers from dizziness.
42  Mr. Del Giglio complains of a burning-type sensation and tightening in his neck at the back and on both sides radiating up the back of his head. The neck pain increased the day after the accident and then got much worse. It was only after attending at physiotherapy that the neck pain began to subside.
43  Mr. Del Giglio attended physiotherapy upon his doctor's advice from February 2009 until December 2009, two days a week. He has daily pain and continues to have a limited range of motion.
Current Situation
Health
44  Mr. Del Giglio continues to have pain in his lower back. It's varies with what activities he has undertaken. Mr. Del Giglio says that his previous (before the January 2009 accident) back pain did not occur on a daily basis and did not prevent him from doing whatever he wanted to do. This back pain is different. His back is aggravated by sitting too long, getting dressed in the morning and immediately after sleep. It is painful for Mr Del Giglio to get out of bed and get in and out of the car. Physiotherapy was of some help that did not return Mr. Del Giglio to his previous level of function. His headaches and mid back flare-up from time to time, but those symptoms have improved.
45  Mr. Del Giglio says that he has also suffered emotional difficulties and depression symptoms. He is grouchy and negative and depressed about not being able to do what he wishes because of the pain. He feels he lacks focus: he has difficulty remembering upcoming events and does not retain information. He relies on his wife to remind him of appointments. Mr. Del Giglio also has continuing problems with sleeping: when the pain medication wears off the back pain wakes him up.
46  Mr. Del Giglio is overweight. He has attempted to achieve weight loss through dieting. He has changed his eating habits but finds it difficult to exercise to burn calories. Mr. Del Giglio is interested in attending a weight-loss clinic and a dietitian consult.
47  Mr. Del Giglio's physicians have recommended continuing with physiotherapy. He continues to utilize ibuprofen, Advil and aspirin on a frequent basis.
Work
48  Mr. Del Giglio has not been able to return to work as a truck driver at J.D.P. Holdings Ltd. He is unable to fulfill the duties of the job which includes prolonged sitting, bending and twisting and other physical aspects. His job remains open. Paul Caravetta, the owner of J.D.P., confirms that he has a demand for drivers and would continue to employ Mr. Del Giglio in the future as long as he wanted if he if he was able and willing to drive. He says there are no less physically demanding jobs at his company.
49  Mr. Del Giglio has attempted to return to work in other capacities. He worked one shift as a security guard but the lymphedema in his leg impaired his mobility and caused his hospitalization the next day. He has attempted to teach music and repair guitars but neither has proven to be successful.
50  Mr. Del Giglio continues to play with the Ken McCoy band. He does not claim any wage loss related to his musical career. He has been able to continue to work with the band and sustain his earnings. Others in the band have had to accommodate Mr. Del Giglio's inability to lift or move heavy items.
Medical Evidence
Dr. Brian Monks
51  Dr. Monks has been Mr. Del Giglio's family physician since April 2007. He treated Mr. Del Giglio for back pain after the accident of May 26, 2008. He diagnosed a strain to the lumbar spine and recommended ibuprofen and physiotherapy. As stated, when Mr. Del Giglio attended Dr. Monks' office on November 25, 2008 he reported some back pain but described his recovery as 90%.
52  In his medical legal report of November 24, 2009, Dr. Monks was of the opinion that the accident of January 6, 2009 caused strain to Mr. Del Giglio's neck and upper and lower back. He says "the impact also caused an aggravation of his pre-existing degenerative disc disease in his cervical and lumbar spines." He continues:
It is now almost 11 months since [the January 2009] accident which I believe is his eighth accident. This one may well be the one that is most serious as it appears unlikely that he will be able to return to his job as a truck driver. He really has made very little progress over the last six months. I would support Mr. Del Giglio's idea that he should train for different work ...
53  Dr. Monks provided a report on April 25, 2011 after his examination of Mr. Del Giglio on March 28, 2011. Mr. Del Giglio informed him that there was no improvement in the six months prior to that appointment. His sitting was limited, household chores aggravated his back pain and performing the duties associated with being a truck driver aggravated his low back pain. Walking did not cause a problem. In that medical legal report Dr. Monks says: "I believe that the last of his many accidents has tipped the scales to render Mr. Del Giglio medically unfit to return to his former job safely."
54  Dr. Monks did not diagnose Mr. Del Giglio to be suffering from depression.
Dr. G.M. McKenzie
55  Dr. McKenzie is an orthopedic surgeon. At the request of his counsel, he examined Mr. Del Giglio on October 7, 2009 and May 4, 2011. Dr. McKenzie had also assessed Mr. Del Giglio after two previous accidents on April 2004 and October 2005.
56  In his medical legal report of October 7, 2009, Dr. McKenzie stated:
With the May 26, 2008 accident in my opinion, he aggravated his neck and back problems. It sounds by his history that those reverted back to his baseline neck and lower back pain prior to his most recent motor vehicle accident January 6, 2009.
In January 2009, in my opinion he again aggravated his neck and lower back. Comparing his neck complaints today to his neck complaints prior to his June 2002 accident and January 2003 accident it sounds quite similar to what he describes now. In my opinion his most recent accident although aggravating his neck pain is unlikely to give him any long term residual effects. In my opinion he has almost returned back to his baseline pre-accident neck pain and in fact may have reached that situation now.
In my opinion the January 6, 2009 accident also aggravated his lower back pain. By his history he still seems to be somewhat worse in his lower back and prior to this motor vehicle accident but it is very similar to the pain complaints that I documented in my last visit with him October 26, 2005.
57  Dr. McKenzie considered that Mr. Del Giglio had returned to work after each accident but after the January 2009 accident he was no longer working as a truck driver. Nevertheless, Dr. McKenzie felt that Mr. Del Giglio's progress for improvement was good.
58  In his medical report of May 4, 2011, Dr. McKenzie related Mr. Del Giglio's complaints of back and neck pain. Dr. McKenzie asked Mr. Del Giglio which accident, May 2008 or January 2009, was most significant. Mr. Del Giglio felt he was almost back to its baseline level of pain after the May 2008 accident. After the January 2009 accident, Mr. Del Giglio said that he could not return to his previous activities and stated "I could get past the pain before but not now."
59  Dr. McKenzie considered that the May 2008 accident caused a "transient aggravation of his pre-existing problems ... [t]hat accident will not give him any long-term problems in his neck and lower back." Dr. McKenzie's opinion is that the January 2009 accident aggravated his pre-existing condition. Dr. McKenzie also considers it Mr. Del Giglio "to be quite susceptible to injury in his neck and back as he had previously significant degenerative changes in the neck and lower back."
60  Dr. McKenzie considered that Mr. Del Giglio's prognosis for improvement was good when he saw him in October 2009. He acknowledges that this prognosis has not proven to be the case and that Mr. Del Giglio had plateaued. Nevertheless Dr. McKenzie suggests that Mr. to Giglio may show some further improvement but the prognosis would be "guarded at best."
61  In his evidence, Dr. McKenzie says:
My main opinion was largely unchanged. I concluded that without the accident [of January 2009], he may have had problems anyway but the accident precipitated this at an earlier rate and it would be impossible to say how much earlier.
He would likely have problems with his ongoing problems and increasing age. The cervical spine injury --the disc tends to dry up and narrow and you can get associated changes which is not uncommon, but we don't know if it would cause any pain. There is no predicative value to whether it will cause pain. Same in the lower back area - same loss of disc space.
62  Dr. McKenzie does not consider Mr. Del Giglio to be totally disabled. He is partially disabled particularly in regard to returning to work as a truck driver.
Dr. J. Purtzki
63  Dr. Purtzki is a physical medicine and rehabilitation consultant. She examined Mr. Del Giglio at the request of his counsel on July 8, 2011. Her medical legal report of July 11, 2011, describes the injuries caused by the January 2009 accident; the nature and extent of any probable or possible residual disability; and any recommendation for treatment in the future. She refers to Mr. Del Giglio describing that he feels "somewhat depressed ... related to chronic pain and a change in his lifestyle ... [and] that he is worried and stressed ... related mainly to his finances."
64  Dr. Purtzki's opinion is that the January 2009 accident aggravated Mr. Del Giglio's pre-existing degenerative changes in his neck and lower back. She recommended that he engage in core strengthening exercises, physiotherapy, diagnostic and therapeutic injections, weight loss with a dietitian consult and the use of regular anti-inflammatory medication.
65  Dr. Purtzki considers that Mr. Del Giglio is "suffering from low-grade depression since the MVA with increased stressors" and "think[s] his presentation is due to chronic pain and adverse life circumstances." She recommends counseling for depression.
66  In her evidence, Dr. Purtzki says that Mr. Del Giglio's lymphedema in his right calf adversely affected mobility and may worsen his back pain. Mr. Del Giglio's excess weight was counterproductive to good spinal mobility and core strength. His Dish syndrome makes the spine immobile.
Functional & Vocational Evidence
Paul Pakulak
67  Paul Pakulak is an occupational therapist. He conducted a functional capacity assessment of Mr. Del Giglio. Mr. Del Giglio demonstrated the capacity for activity requiring modified medium light level strength. He has specific limitations related to prolonged and repetitive below waist level work, overhead work and sitting. Prolonged activity above the medium-light level will adversely impact his productivity and safety.
68  Mr. Pakulak considers Mr. Del Giglio's overall capacity to compete for work in the open job market has been reduced. He cannot continue in his previous work as a truck driver.
Derek Nordin
69  Mr. Norton completed of vocational assessment and Mr. Del Giglio on October 27, 2010. He conducted a battery of tests to gauge Mr. Del Giglio's academic achievement and intellect. He does not recommend retraining. He considers that Mr. Del Giglio age and ongoing back problems, limited experience in jobs other than truck driving are barriers to Mr. Del Giglio's successfully marketing himself to a new field in competition with younger and more able-bodied competitors.
Natalia Allende
70  Ms. Allende is also an occupational therapist. She completed a cost of future care assessment at the Del Giglio household, on September 9, 2011. She recommends one-time care costs for physiotherapy/kinesiology, the healthy heart program, dietitian, psychological and occupational therapy amounting to <damage type = "other">$3,537</damage>-<damage type = "other">$6,611</damage>. The annual care costs include a gym membership, home maintenance, housekeeping and non-prescription medications amounting to <damage type = "other">$1,859.85</damage> - <damage type = "other">$2,897.92</damage> annually.
Causation
Position of the Parties
71  The plaintiff's position is that he suffered a re-aggravation of his neck and lower back pain in the January 2009 accident. While there was some initial improvement with physiotherapy, Mr. Del Giglio did not return to his previous baseline level of pain. His lower back pain levels have increased and his neck pain has gone from intermittent to constant. He is no longer able to perform the activities associated with driving a truck.
72  The defendants' position on causation is twofold: first they argue that Mr. Del Giglio's injuries from the January 2009 accident and the May 2008 accident are indivisible. Because the plaintiff settled his claim against the driver involved in the May 2008 accident and signed a release, the release releases all other joint tortfeasors, specifically these defendants. Second, they assert that the "crumbling skull" rule applies to Mr. Del Giglio.
The Law
Divisible and Indivisible Injuries
73  Divisible injuries are those which are capable of being separated, such as injuries to different body parts or injuries to which the defendant has not contributed (Bradley v. Groves, , at para. 20; see also Athey v. Leonati, , at paras. 22-25.) Whether damage derived from multiple sources is divisible for the purpose of determining the extent of the liability of one defendant is a question of fact.
74  If the injuries are divisible, the devaluation approach from Long v. Thiessen (1968), 65 W.W.R. 577 at 591 (B.C.C.A.) is the appropriate method for determining the amount of damages that can be attributed to the defendant. This was discussed in Bradley at para. 33:
The approach to apportionment in Long v. Thiessen is therefore no longer applicable to indivisible injuries. The reason is that Long v. Thiessen pre-supposes divisibility: Long requires courts to take a single injury and divide it up into constituent causes or points in time, and assess damages twice; once on the day before the second tort, and once at trial. Each defendant is responsible only for their share of the injury and the plaintiff can recover only the appropriate portion from each tortfeasor.
[emphasis in original]
75  Indivisible injuries are those that cannot be separated, such as aggravation or exacerbation of an earlier injury, an injury to the same area of the body, or global symptoms that are impossible to separate: Bradley, at para. 20; see also Athey, at paras. 22-25.
76  If the injuries are indivisible, the court must apply the "but for" test in respect of the defendant's act. Even though there may be several tortious or non-tortious causes of injury, so long as the defendant's act is a cause, the defendant is fully liable for that damage: Bradley, at paras. 32-37; see also Resurfice Corp. v. Hanke,  at paras. 19-23.
The "Thin Skull" and "Crumbling Skull" Rules
77  A basic principle of damages in tort cases is that "the defendant need not put the plaintiff in a better position than ... his original position and should not compensate the plaintiff for any damages ... he would have suffered anyway": Blackwater v. Plint,  at para. 78; see also Bradley at para. 25. This is known as the "crumbling skull rule": Athey at para. 35; see also Blackwater, at para. 80.
78  On the other hand, the defendant "takes his victim as he finds him": Blackwater, at para. 79. This means, the defendant is "liable for the plaintiff's injuries even if the injuries are unexpectedly severe owing to a pre-existing condition": Athey, at para. 34. This is known as the "thin skull rule": Blackwater, at para. 79.
79  Mr. Del Giglio must establish that the defendants' negligence caused or materially contributed to his injuries. The defendant's negligence need not be the sole cause of the injury as long it is part of the cause: Athey at paras. 13 - 19.
Discussion
80  Mr. Del Giglio advised Dr. Monks in November 2008 that he was 90% recovered from the injuries he sustained in the May 2008 accident. He was back at work full-time. He had returned to his baseline level of pain when the January 2009 accident occurred. His evidence is supported by Dr. Monks who was in contact with Mr. Del Giglio from April 2007, but most particularly between March and November 2008. Dr. Monks was in the best position of all the physicians to assess Mr. Del Giglio's condition before the January 2009 accident. While Dr. Monks relies on Mr. Del Giglio's statement to him concerning his 90% recovery, there really is no better evidence upon which I can rely to determine that his situation was otherwise. It is also supported by other facts, most particularly, that Mr. Del Giglio was working full-time, pursuing his music career and engaging in his normal level of activity.
81  Dr. McKenzie explains that Mr. Del Giglio's injuries from the May 2008 accident were aggravated in the January 2009 accident. Nonetheless, he considers that the May 2008 accident was a "transient aggravation of his pre-existing problems" whereas the January 2009 accident has resulted in a more permanent though partial disability.
82  Dr. McKenzie acknowledges that Mr. Del Giglio would like have developed symptoms associated with his ongoing health problems and increasing age. Nevertheless, Dr. McKenzie is of the view that he could not predict whether these pre-existing problems would cause pain. Dr. Purtzki has referred to the plaintiff's other health problems, including the lymphedema, the DISH syndrome and his weight of as counterproductive to spinal mobility and core strength.
83  I find that the medical evidence supports that the injuries sustained in the May 2008 accident are divisible from those sustained in the January 2009 accident. While Mr. Del Giglio's back was susceptible to injury, the May 2008 accident did not put him in the position which he is in now: restricted from working as a truck driver at all and from many of his normal activities.
84  Because the injuries which Mr. Del Giglio sustained in the May 2008 accident and the January 2009 accident are divisible, I reject the defendants' position that because he settled his claim against the driver involved in the May 2008 accident and signed a release that he has released all other joint tortfeasors, specifically these defendants.
85  In respect of the defendants' assertion that the crumbling skull condition applies, the plaintiff has established that he had a baseline which was not free of pain, but had a manageable amount of pain. There is no evidence that he was worsening or deteriorating before the motor vehicle accident from that baseline. Dr. McKenzie agrees that with his ongoing problems and increasing age he may have had problems anyway. His opinion was that the accident precipitated this at an earlier rate but he could not say how much earlier.
86  I am satisfied that Mr. Del Giglio's current symptoms would not be present, but for the accident of January 6, 2009. I accept that Mr. Del Giglio has challenging health issues; he was able to function at his baseline level with a manageable amount of pain. While there may have been deterioration in his ability to function as he aged, the evidence satisfies me that the accident of January 6, 2009 caused the abrupt physical and mental decline that Mr. Del Giglio experienced.
Damages
Duty to Mitigate
87  Once the plaintiff establishes that the defendant is liable for his injuries, the burden shifts to the defendant. In order to prove that the plaintiff did not meet his duty to mitigate, the defence must prove that he acted unreasonably and that reasonable conduct would have reduced or eliminated the loss. Whether the plaintiff acted reasonably is a factual question: Gilbert v. Bottle,  at para. 202. Gilbert continues at para. 203:
A relevant circumstance in cases such as this is the plaintiff's personality and condition before and after the accident. The law does not require a plaintiff to do that which cannot be controlled, nor does it require perfection in the pursuit of rehabilitation. In addition, the defendant must take the victim as found, which may affect what is to be reasonably expected. For example, a person who has struggled with life-long obesity may not be expected to lose substantial weight to discharge the duty to mitigate, even though weight loss would assist recovery. What the law requires is that the plaintiff makes contextually reasonable and sincere efforts to limit his or her damages and loss [citations omitted].
[emphasis added]
88  The evidence is clear that Mr. Del Giglio has struggled with lifelong obesity. He has attempted to lose weight in accordance with his doctor's advice and has been somewhat successful. The plaintiff asserts that with assistance, including physiotherapy, kinesiology, the healthy heart program, a dietician and a gym membership he will likely lose weight and build his core strength.
89  I find that Mr. Del Giglio has made "contextually reasonable and sincere efforts" to lose weight, but would benefit considerably from professional assistance. I disagree with the defendants that his damages should be reduced to reflect his reflected failure to mitigate. The defendants have not proven a failure to mitigate.
Non-Pecuniary Damages
90  Non-pecuniary damages are awarded to compensate the plaintiff for pain, suffering, loss of enjoyment of life and loss of amenities. Many cases refer to a list of factors (Stapley v. Hejslet,  at para. 46), which generally address the plaintiff's age, the nature of the injury, the severity and duration of the pain, the level of the disability and the loss of lifestyle or impairment of life. The compensation should be fair to all parties and fairness is measured against all awards made in comparable cases which provide general guidance. Each case must be decided on its own facts.
91  The evidence supports, and I have found, that Mr. Del Giglio suffered a re-aggravation of his neck and lower back pain in the January 2009 accident. He has reached a plateau in his recovery. He has not returned to his baseline level of activity which he enjoyed before the accident. He has not returned to his pre-accident level of pain. Though initially optimistic, Mr. Del Giglio's physicians are all of the view that his prognosis is "guarded at best."
92  Mr. Del Giglio has suffered pain and loss of enjoyment of his life. The injuries have had a serve impact. I accept that Mr. Del Giglio's pain has been distressful and have affected his emotional state. Despite Dr. Monk's not having diagnosed depression, Dr. Purtzki did find such symptoms, which are anticipatable, given the reduction in the activities, including the ability to work, which Mr. Del Giglio has experienced.
93  On the other hand, Mr. Del Giglio has been able to maintain his musical career, a vocation that he clearly thrives upon. That is a factor which I will take into account.
94  A further factor is that Mr. Del Giglio is aging and some deterioration in his cervical spine is, in Dr. McKenzie's words, "not uncommon." I accept that he would have had some increased pain at some point, but the accident accelerated the onset.
95  Mr. Del Giglio argues that the non-pecuniary damages should be between <damage type = "other">$72,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$90,000</damage>. The defendants assert that the decline in Mr. Del Giglio's health was not the result of the soft-tissue injuries he sustained in the January 2009 accident and asserts that non-pecuniary damages should be in the range of between <damage type = "other">$20,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$30,000</damage>.
96  I have specifically found that the plaintiff's pain is the result of the injuries that he sustained in the January 2009 accident, and that they are not of a mild or moderate nature. The prognosis is that they will continue, likely without abatement, throughout Mr. Del Giglio's life. None of Mr. Del Giglio's physicians suggest that he will have much improvement.
97  Having reviewed the cases provided, I conclude a fair and reasonable award for non-pecuniary damages is <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$80,000</damage>.
Loss of Earning Capacity
Past
98  Mr. Del Giglio is 57 years old. At the time of the accident, in January 2009, he was employed as a truck driver with J.D.P. Holdings Ltd. The evidence of his previous employer, Paul Caravetta, is that he would continue to be employed as long as he was able and willing to drive. There is no alternative work with J.D.P., which could accommodate Mr. Del Giglio's physical limitations.
99  Mr. Del Giglio relies on the evidence of Stephen J. Bush, a chartered accountant, who calculated his past loss of income as <damage type = "other">$91,460</damage> based on the following:
Mr. Del Giglio would have continued driving trucks for J.D.P. Holdings Ltd. during the period between January 6, 2009 and the present;
A reasonable pattern of work, based on his work history prior to the accident and the availability of work, would have been 142 hours per month;
The hourly rate of pay during the period would be <damage type = "other">$19.75</damage>, or <damage type = "other">$20.54</damage> including 4% holiday pay;
Mr. Del Giglio would work 11 months per year; and
The tax calculations are made by applying the appropriate marginal tax rate to the pre-tax loss determined each year in the loss period.
100  On that basis, Mr. Del Giglio's pre-tax wage loss would be <damage type = "other">$91,460</damage> and his after tax wage loss would be <damage type = "other">$74,291</damage>.
101  The defendants submit that the plaintiff is not entitled to any income claimed to have been lost because of the accident. The defendants submit that Mr. Del Giglio has already been compensated for loss of his truck driving income in the earlier trial judgment of Boyle J.
102  I accept the plaintiff's calculation of Mr. Del Giglio's past loss of income. He was not compensated for that loss in the decision of Boyle J. in 1993.
103  As I have pointed out, in para. 33 above, Boyle J. assessed Mr. Del Giglio's past loss of income related only to his long-haul truck driving. He did not compensate Mr. Del Giglio for a total disability from truck driving. He explicitly found that "local like truck driving was [within] his physical reach." As it happened, Boyle J. was accurate in his assessment. Mr. Del Giglio was able to return to truck driving and did so in 2005, when he took a regular job at J.D.P. Holdings Ltd.
104  I therefore award Mr. Del Giglio, in accordance with s. 98 of the Insurance (Vehicle) Act, R.S.B.C. 1966, c. 231, damages reflecting his past net income loss of <damage type = "past wage loss">$74,291</damage>.
Future
105  Mr. Del Giglio's physicians unanimously conclude that the accident of January 6, 2009, has rendered him unfit to pursue his career in truck driving. Mr. Del Giglio has provided evidence of his attempts to find other work, which have been either unsuccessful or un-remunerative.
106  The plaintiff asserts that Mr. Del Giglio's loss of future wages, due to his inability to drive a truck is approximately <damage type = "other">$32,000</damage> per year. Using the multipliers provided by Mr. Robert Carson, a consulting economist, the future loss of income to Mr. Del Giglio's age 65 has a present value of <damage type = "other">$210,496</damage>. The plaintiff argues that an appropriate contingency of 20% should be applied to that future loss of earning capacity.
107  The defendants argue, as they did with past loss of earning capacity, that Mr. Del Giglio has already been compensated for all future loss truck driving income in his personal injury award in 1993. The defendants say that the evidence supports that Mr. Del Giglio's can return to truck driving and that any future loss of earning capacity is unreasonable and unfair.
108  A claim for loss of earning capacity raises two questions:
Has the plaintiff's earning capacity been impaired by his injuries;
If so, what compensation should be awarded for the resulting financial harm that will accrue over time?
109  This requires an assessment of damages, not a mathematical calculation.
110  There are two approaches to assessment of loss of future earnings capacity described in Perrin v. Lalari,  at para. 32: the earnings approach and capital asset approach. The plaintiff is urging the earnings approach in its submission. It is unnecessary to consider the capital asset approach, as neither party is advocating that approach.
111  In this case, Mr. Del Giglio had a job that would have had continued to employ him as long as he wished, where he could earn a determined rate of pay for a specified number of hours during each calendar year. He has demonstrated that there is a real and substantial possibility of a future income loss: Chang v. Feng, .
112  I assess Mr. Del Giglio's future loss of earning capacity at <damage type = "future wage loss">$150,000</damage>.
Cost of Future Care
113  Mr. Del Giglio relies on the opinion of Ms. Allende, the occupational therapist. She assessed the residual effects of Mr. Del Giglio's injury on his current and future ability to function independently at his home. She made several recommendations including those to which I have already referred.
114  The defendants say that Mr. Del Giglio is not entitled to any future cost of care award on the basis that the plaintiff stated that he felt that the best therapy for his back was walking his dogs. The defendants also suggest that Ms. Allende assumed that Mr. Del Giglio had no limitations in function before the January 2009 accident, which the defendants assert is incorrect.
115  The plaintiff is entitled to compensation for the cost of future care based on what is reasonably necessary to restore him to his pre-accident condition so far as that is possible. The court must assure full compensation through the provision of adequate future care based on what is reasonably necessary on the medical evidence: Gilbert para. 250.
116  I am satisfied that the medical evidence, particularly that of Dr. Purtzki supports an award as calculated by Ms. Allende. There is no other evidence before me concerning future care costs.
117  I therefore award one-time costs to include physiotherapy, kinesiology, healthy heart program (YMCA), dietician, psychology and occupational therapy, at <damage type = "other">$5,000</damage>; annual care costs including gym membership, home maintenance, housekeeping and non -prescription medications at <damage type = "other">$2,000</damage> annually. A calculation of that cost exceeds the award which the plaintiff seeks under this head of damage which is <damage type = "other">$25,000</damage>. I assess damages for cost of future care as <damage type = "future care">$25,000</damage>.
Special Damages
118  Mr. Del Giglio claims a total of <damage type = "other">$3,110.71</damage> in special damages. Of that, he claims <damage type = "other">$1,067.90</damage> for moving and temporary storage charges. The move occurred in January 2009, a few weeks after the accident. Mr. Del Giglio could have done the move himself with a couple of friends and a truck he would have borrowed from his employer. He could not do that because of the injuries he sustained in the January 2009 accident. He also sustained expenses for storage.
119  I allow special damages in the amount of <damage type = "special">$2,577</damage> which reflects those that are claimed and half of the moving expenses. I cannot find that the storage fees are attributable to the accident.
Summary
120  The defendants are liable for the accident of January 6, 2009.
121  Damages are assessed as follows:
 Non-Pecuniary Damages: <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$80,000.00</damage> 
 Past Wage Loss: <damage type = "past wage loss">$74,291.00</damage> 
 Future Loss of Earning Capacity: <damage type = "future wage loss">$150,000.00</damage> 
 Cost of Future Care: <damage type = "future care">$25,000.00</damage> 
 Special Damages: <damage type = "special">$2,577.00</damage> 
 TOTAL: <damage type = "total">$331,868.00</damage> 
122  Mr. Del Giglio is entitled to his costs. If there are matters which I ought to consider in regard to costs, the parties may appear to address those matters.
J.M. GROPPER J.
End of Document
Rycroft v. Rego, [2017] B.C.J. No. 447
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
New Westminster, British Columbia
J.W. Williams J.
Heard: July 11-15, 2016.
Judgment: March 7, 2017.
Docket: S135904
Registry: New Westminster
[2017] B.C.J. No. 447   |   2017 BCSC 373
Between William Joseph Rycroft, Plaintiff, and Nelson Rego, Defendant
(174 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — For torts — Affecting the person — Assault — Action for damages for battery allowed in part — 63-year-old plaintiff sustained bruised temple, sore arm, elbow, jaw and hands, and disturbance to left eye, which resolved — It was accepted that falling to knees in altercation caused injury to plaintiff's right knee, which would require replacement — Plaintiff awarded $70,000 non-pecuniary loss — Plaintiff worked 2.5 weeks after incident and sporadically thereafter, but had sporadic work history and pre-existing left knee injury — Plaintiff awarded $100,000 past wage loss — No accepted plaintiff would have worked until age 70 — Plaintiff awarded $45,000 future income loss and $2,500 aggravated damages.
Damages — Physical and psychological damages — Physical injuries — Body injuries — Soft tissue — Head injuries — Eyes — Impaired vision — Jaw — Leg injuries — Knee — Considerations impacting on award — Pre-existing injuries — Action for damages for battery allowed in part — 63-year-old plaintiff sustained bruised temple, sore arm, elbow, jaw and hands, and disturbance to left eye, which resolved — It was accepted that falling to knees in altercation caused injury to plaintiff's right knee, which would require replacement — Plaintiff awarded $70,000 non-pecuniary loss — Plaintiff worked 2.5 weeks after incident and sporadically thereafter, but had sporadic work history and pre-existing left knee injury — Plaintiff awarded $100,000 past wage loss — No accepted plaintiff would have worked until age 70 — Plaintiff awarded $45,000 future income loss and $2,500 aggravated damages.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Considerations — Employment status — Loss of earning capacity — Special damages — Past loss of income — Employment income — Non-pecuniary loss — Pain and suffering — Aggravated damages — Nature or character of wrongful act — Action for damages for battery allowed in part — 63-year-old plaintiff sustained bruised temple, sore arm, elbow, jaw and hands, and disturbance to left eye, which resolved — It was accepted that falling to knees in altercation caused injury to plaintiff's right knee, which would require replacement — Plaintiff awarded <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$70,000</damage> non-pecuniary loss — Plaintiff worked 2.5 weeks after incident and sporadically thereafter, but had sporadic work history and pre-existing left knee injury — Plaintiff awarded <damage type = "past wage loss">$100,000</damage> past wage loss — No accepted plaintiff would have worked until age 70 — Plaintiff awarded <damage type = "future wage loss">$45,000</damage> future income loss and <damage type = "aggravated">$2,500</damage> aggravated damages.
Tort law — Trespass — To person — Battery — Defences — Self-defence — Provocation — Action for damages for battery allowed in part — Plaintiff's version of events that defendant confronted, struck him and put him in headlock after plaintiff fell to ground was accepted, but not that defendant delivered multiple blows while plaintiff was on ground — Defendant's claim he approached plaintiff calmly and was attacked was at odds with his claim plaintiff threatened his son and with evidence of three eye witnesses — Tort of battery established — Defendant did not act in self-defence or defence of anyone and plaintiff did nothing to constitute provocation.
Action for damages for battery. A neighbour observed the defendant's son and a friend playing near the plaintiff's bike park and was concerned they were damaging it, so told the boys to leave and called the plaintiff. When the plaintiff came home, he went to investigate and saw the boys on the corner of his property again. The plaintiff testified he told the boys to leave, and then heard "don't" and saw the defendant approaching. The plaintiff testified he said "you must be the dad" and started to explain why he did not want the boys playing there, but the defendant punched him in the side of the head so he was knocked to his knees, and then placed him in a stranglehold and continued punching him and hitting him in the legs until the defendant's wife told the defendant to stop. The defendant testified his son and the friend said a man had threatened to kick their heads in, so he approached the plaintiff and asked if there was a problem with the kids. The defendant testified the plaintiff started yelling at him, pushed him and was about to throw a punch, so the defendant placed the plaintiff in a headlock. The defendant testified the plaintiff slammed him to the ground, but he held on and his wife yelled at him to stop. The defendant testified the plaintiff reached into his pocket so he and his wife ran. The plaintiff claimed he sustained bruising to his left temple, minor injuries to his arm, elbow, and hands, a cataract in his left eye, and injuries to his knees that required a knee replacement of his left knee and would require one for the right. 

HELD: Action allowed in part.
 The plaintiff's version of events was accepted to the extent the defendant approached him angrily, struck him so he fell to his knees and then placed him into a headlock where they had a brief struggle. It was not accepted that the defendant continued to throw punches. The defendant's evidence he approached the plaintiff calmly despite his allegation his son was threatened, and that the plaintiff attacked him was both inconsistent with common sense and the evidence of three witnesses. The defendant also gave conflicting answers about whether he was injured and why he thought the plaintiff reached in his pocket. The defendant's wife claimed she missed the beginning of the fight, which was contrary to witness evidence she was running after the defendant trying to stop him. It was telling that only the plaintiff called the police after the incident. The defendant did not act in defence of himself or anyone else and the plaintiff did nothing to constitute provocation. The 63-year-old plaintiff was a long-haul trucker who worked for 2.5 weeks after the accident, then was off work and then worked sporadically. The plaintiff sustained a meniscus tear to his right knee and also had degenerative arthritis, but the latter was asymptomatic prior to the assault. The plaintiff sustained minor soft tissue injuries and bruising that quickly resolved and an injury to his left eye that was substantially resolved. The plaintiff's left knee injury was pre-existing and he tried to obtain workers' compensation for it just days before the assault. The plaintiff did not establish the assault aggravated his left knee. The plaintiff suffered real injuries and would have continued discomfort, particularly from the future right knee replacement. The plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$70,000</damage> non-pecuniary damages. Considering the plaintiff was actively pursuing workers' compensation at the time of the incident, had other medical issues and a sporadic work history, he was awarded <damage type = "past wage loss">$100,000</damage> past wage loss. It was quite unlikely the plaintiff would have worked to age 70 so he was awarded <damage type = "future wage loss">$45,000</damage> future loss of earnings. The plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "aggravated">$2,500</damage> aggravated damages but there was no basis for punitive damages, and this was not a calculated assault and the award was already substantial. Submissions were needed on the claims under the Crime Victim Assistance Act and Heath Care Costs Recovery Act.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Crime Victim Assistance Act, S.B.C. 2001, c. 38,
Health Care Costs Recovery Act, S.B.C. 2008, c. 27,
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: D. Grunder.
Counsel for the Defendant: C. Morcom.
Reasons for Judgment
J.W. WILLIAMS J.
Introduction
1  The plaintiff, William Joseph Rycroft, brings an action alleging the tort of battery. He says that the defendant Nelson Rego wrongfully inflicted physical violence upon him.
2  For the reasons that follow, I rule in Mr. Rycroft's favour.
Background
3  In July 2009, the plaintiff was residing in a rented home located on 227th Street in Maple Ridge, BC. The house is situated on the eastern end of a large parcel of property, with the western portion of that property being, for the most part, an undeveloped acreage. In all, the property is somewhere between 3 and 5 acres in size. The land is owned by a man named Isaaks, who lives in a house located on the western edge of the property. Although he was not a witness to the subject events or a participant in the trial, he was referenced during the course of testimony.
4  There is a 'bike park', as the parties have referred to it, situated on a portion of the property northwest of the plaintiff's home. As I understand it, this is an area where the plaintiff's son and another young man had, some time ago, set up a course for BMX bikes. The park consists of ramps and bridges.
5  The defendant lives with his wife and son in a home located along the southern border of the property. His backyard abuts the property and is separated from it by a small creek. The backyard itself is fairly small, measuring approximately 40 feet by 40 feet.
6  On July 10, 2009, the plaintiff, who was then working as a long-haul trucker, was out of town. That afternoon, he was returning to the Lower Mainland from the interior of the province. He delivered his truck to his employer's depot in Abbottsford, and then drove to his home in his own vehicle, arriving there at approximately 7:30 p.m.
7  Earlier that same day, during the afternoon, the defendant's 12-year-old son, Jordan, was entertaining a friend, Jesse, a young man of the same age who was visiting the Rego residence.
8  At some point, the two boys were apparently playing in the area of the bike park. They were noticed by a neighbour who lived on the south side of the property, approximately halfway between the residences of the plaintiff and the defendant. The neighbour, Peter Henkels, was concerned that the boys were causing damage to the park. As a consequence, he did two things. First, he went on to the property to tell the children to get away from that area. Second, he called the plaintiff on the telephone, advising him that the boys were on the property. The plaintiff explained that he was out of town but that he would be returning later that day.
9  Evidently the boys went home after Mr. Henkels spoke to them.
10  The evidence is that the boys went back to the Rego residence and told Ms. Rego (the defendant's wife) that a man had yelled at them and told them to get off the property. She told the boys to stay home and, initially, they remained inside of the Rego house. Later, they asked to go out and she said that they could, but they had to remain in the yard.
11  A short time later, the plaintiff arrived home. He testified that, shortly before returning home, he had purchased a slurpee beverage. When he arrived home, his first order of business was to walk into the backyard to see if there had been damage to the bike park. He testified that, as he did so, he had the slurpee drink in one hand and a cigarette in the other.
12  What occurred next is a matter of considerable contention. Both parties agree that there was an altercation between the plaintiff and the defendant. However, the specifics of that -- how it came about and what actually took place -- are disputed.
13  A number of witnesses testified about the events leading up to the physical contact between the two men, as well as the altercation itself. In addition to testifying himself, the plaintiff called three of his neighbours as witnesses. Additionally, the plaintiff called evidence relating to the injuries he claims to have sustained and the effects of those injuries upon him, including testimony from his mother.
14  The defendant also testified, and called his wife, his son Jordan, and Jesse, his son's friend, as witnesses.
Issues
15  The issues to be determined in this trial fall into two categories:
Has the plaintiff proven that the defendant committed battery against him?
If the Court is satisfied that the tort of battery has been made out, what injuries and consequences have been proven, and what monetary damages are appropriate?
Positions of the Parties
16  The plaintiff says that the evidence adduced at trial constitutes proof of an unlawful battery. In addition, he submits that no defence, such as self-defence, consent, or provocation, has been made out.
17  The defendant disputes liability. He says that a fair assessment of the evidence should satisfy this Court that he acted in self-defence, and that he used no more force than was proper in the circumstances. The defendant also says that the Court should find that there was consent to the physical encounter between the men, such that the plaintiff is not able to maintain this action. Finally, the defendant submits that this Court should consider whether provocation is a factor in the assessment of liability, although he provided no submissions on that issue.
Analysis and Discussion
Liability for Battery
18  As outlined in Saether v. Irvine,  at paras. 49 and 51-53, the principles that apply to the tort of battery are as follows:
[49] ...Battery is the intentional application of force constituting a harmful or offensive contact with another, without the other's consent.
...
[51] Once the plaintiff has established that there was a battery, and that injuries were caused by it, the defendant has the onus of establishing any defence he may have and, in addition, that the force used was reasonable in the circumstances.
[52] The law does not provide an absolute bar to the use of force. In fact, a party will be permitted to use force where it is taken for the purpose of defending himself or another or in defence of that person's property. However, the force used to effect that defence must not be more than necessary for the purpose at hand: it cannot be unreasonably disproportionate to the nature of the evil sought to be avoided. Where the force used by the defendant falls within that scope, that is, acting in such defence and not of an excessive degree, the defendant will not be liable.
[53] The degree of force used will not be subjected to an especially critical examination: it has been said that the law will not concern itself with niceties in such matters.
The Evidence of Battery
19  In determining liability, my assessments regarding the credibility of the witnesses have substantially informed my analysis.
20  There is significant disparity between the evidence presented on behalf of the plaintiff as compared to that adduced in favour of the defendant. Not surprisingly, each side urges the Court to find that their evidence is straightforward and reliable, and to conclude that the other's case is fraught with flaws and inconsistencies.
21  The factors to be considered when assessing credibility were succinctly summarized in Bradshaw v. Stenner,  at para. 186:
[186] Credibility involves an assessment of the trustworthiness of a witness' testimony based upon the veracity or sincerity of a witness and the accuracy of the evidence that the witness provides (Raymond v. Bosanquet (Township) (1919),  (SCC), ,  (S.C.C.)). The art of assessment involves examination of various factors such as the ability and opportunity to observe events, the firmness of his memory, the ability to resist the influence of interest to modify his recollection, whether the witness' evidence harmonizes with independent evidence that has been accepted, whether the witness changes his testimony during direct and cross-examination, whether the witness' testimony seems unreasonable, impossible, or unlikely, whether a witness has a motive to lie, and the demeanour of a witness generally (Wallace v. Davis,  (Ont.H.C.); Faryna v. Chorny,  (BC CA),  (B.C.C.A.) [Farnya]; R. v. S.(R.D.),  (SCC),  at para.128 (S.C.C.)). Ultimately, the validity of the evidence depends on whether the evidence is consistent with the probabilities affecting the case as a whole and shown to be in existence at the time (Farnya at para. 356).
22  I will commence my analysis by summarizing the testimony of both the plaintiff and the defendant regarding the relevant events.
23  The plaintiff testified that, after he got home and went into the yard, he saw some children in the corner of the property. He said that he told them to leave. He claims that he then started to walk over to investigate whether there was any damage to the bike park. As he was making his way there, he claims he heard a voice say "don't," and then turned to see Mr. and Ms. Rego walking towards him. The plaintiff testified that, after Mr. Rego walked to within 3 to 5 feet of him, he said "you must be the dad; I do not want kids playing there anymore because...," being interrupted mid-sentence by the defendant striking him on the left side of his head. Mr. Rycroft said that, at the time he was struck, his head was turned to the right.
24  The plaintiff testified that he was partially knocked down. Following that, he said that Mr. Rego moved behind him, jumped on his back and put him in a stranglehold. The plaintiff claims that he then went down and that Mr. Rego punched him, He also recalled getting "whacked" on the back of his leg when he tried to stand up. At that point, he said he was on his elbows and knees, and felt the back of his leg being struck again. He testified that he was "freaked out" because he was concerned that the violence was going to trigger his heart arrhythmia. He recalls the defendant's wife yelling "he [the plaintiff] cannot breathe," and that Mr. Rego responding by letting go, running about 5 feet away, and saying words to the effect "do you want round two?" Mr. Rycroft said that his reply was "you bet" but that he did not take any physical action against the defendant. Shortly after, Mr. Rego left, and the plaintiff then called the police.
25  The defendant's testimony was that, after dinner, his son and Jesse came into the house and said that a man had threatened to kick their heads in. He testified that he then went out of the house and into the yard, intending to identify the person. He saw a large man, Mr. Rycroft, and approached him, saying "excuse me are there problems with the kids?" He said the plaintiff replied "yeah you need to keep your fucking kids off my property." The defendant said that he responded by trying to explain that he had lived there for 14 years and pointed to his home. He said Mr. Rycroft replied "I know where you live. I need to go. You keep your kids off my property, you fucking Hindu."
26  The defendant said the plaintiff then pushed him, putting his hand on the defendant's left shoulder. His evidence was that, at that point, he was not angry but concerned. He said he first took a step back, and then he jumped up and put the plaintiff in a headlock. He claims that the plaintiff then started to throw a punch, and so he did as well. The defendant said the plaintiff subsequently "body-slammed" him into the ground, but that he continued to hold the plaintiff in a headlock.
27  The defendant testified that his wife then arrived, yelling at the men to stop. Mr. Rego testified that they both stood up and that the plaintiff said "you fucking Hindu" to him again. The defendant also described that, at that point, the plaintiff reached into his pocket, scaring Mr. Rego, who thought Mr. Rycroft had a weapon. The defendant said that he then grabbed his wife's hand and they left.
28  In essence, the defendant claims that, given that the plaintiff was a big man, after Mr. Rycroft pushed him, he became scared and that he lost his temper, having no choice but to fight back.
29  A number of witnesses testified regarding the altercation. In addition to the plaintiff and the defendant, those witnesses included the defendant's wife, as well as three persons who, at the time, were sitting on a nearby backyard deck having a barbecue and who watched the events.
30  Based on my examination of all of the evidence, my conclusions with respect to what occurred are as follows.
31  In order to investigate the reported damage caused to the bike park, shortly after returning home, the plaintiff entered the yard behind his residence. Immediately before the altercation, while Mr. Rycroft was walking at a moderate pace in the general direction of his own home, Mr. Rego, walking quite briskly, approached him.
32  I accept that the plaintiff said words to the effect of "you must be the dad; I do not want kids playing there anymore."
33  I find that, at that point, the defendant struck the side of the plaintiff's head. The version of events which most sensibly and logically explains the resulting bruise is that, when he was struck, Mr. Rycroft had his head turned to the right. The punch was of significant force and unexpected.
34  As a consequence of the blow, the plaintiff went down in a forward direction, ending up on his knees. He had his hands on the ground. The defendant immediately applied some type of headlock to Mr. Rycroft from behind.
35  The two men struggled, with Mr. Rego behind and above Mr. Rycroft. No significant blows were landed.
36  The physical engagement ended fairly quickly. The defendant let go of the plaintiff and moved away, and the plaintiff got to his feet.
37  The defendant said something to the effect of "do you want round two?" or "do you want some more?" The plaintiff responded in the affirmative, I expect probably more reflexively than seriously, but did nothing physically to further engage with the defendant. Instead, the plaintiff reached into his pocket, took out his phone, and called 911.
38  At that point, the defendant and his wife left and went home.
39  In the course of the altercation, the plaintiff sustained an injury to his left temple area, an injury which is depicted in the photo marked Exhibit 6. I find that bruise was caused by a blow from the defendant.
40  It is also reasonable to conclude that Mr. Rycroft sustained minor injuries to his arm, his elbow area, and his hand, likely from going to the ground.
41  Finally, I accept that the plaintiff incurred some injury to his knees, also resulting from going to the ground.
42  The plaintiff's description of the events includes the claim that he was punched multiple times and that he was struck twice on the back of his leg. I am unable to find that the defendant administered those blows.
43  In so finding, I do not mean to suggest that I believe the plaintiff is deliberately being untruthful when he described those blows. The fact is that, certainly from the perspective of the plaintiff, the events of the altercation occurred quite suddenly. There was a flurry of physical activity in the course of which he was struck and driven to the ground. In those circumstances, it is not reasonable to expect that he would have a clear, precise, step-by-step, recollection of everything that occurred.
44  The conclusions I have reached obviously do not accord with the testimony of the defendant and his wife. Specifically, I reject Mr. Rego's contention that he approached the plaintiff in a benign and inoffensive manner, that the incident began when the plaintiff stuck or pushed him, and that, in the course of the altercation, the plaintiff "body-slammed" him to the ground.
45  Some explanation for my findings is warranted.
46  A significant influence on my findings is the evidence provided by the three non-involved witnesses. As described above, these witnesses were situated on their back deck, an elevated location which provided a reasonably good vantage point from which to observe the events in question.
47  In examining the evidence of each of those three persons, I recognize that their descriptions of the events were not exactly the same. However, while there are some differences in terms of details, overall, their descriptions of the events are substantially and essentially similar. That, it seems to me, is what one might sensibly expect when persons are called upon to describe, fully and carefully, the details of a fairly brief encounter which they witnessed some seven years prior.
48  I am also cognizant of the fact that each of these witnesses knew the plaintiff previously. They had some type of acquaintanceship with him, whereas none of them had any such prior connection to the defendant.
49  Nevertheless, I observed each of these persons testify, in chief and under cross-examination, and I have scrutinized with care both the presentation and the content of their testimony. I find no reason to believe that any of them was tailoring his or her evidence to favour the plaintiff. I find no basis to disregard or substantially discount the evidence that these witnesses gave, other than to be cautious about it, given the passage of time and the fact that the ability of honest witnesses to observe, recall, and recount events cannot be held to a standard of perfection.
50  The evidence of these witnesses has informed my conclusion as to what occurred that day.
51  My assessment of the veracity and reliability of the plaintiff's description of the events is that he was generally trying to describe what happened in an accurate way. Certainly, I accept his evidence that he did not initiate any physical contact with the defendant.
52  I am not prepared to find that he has provided a description of the details of what occurred that is absolutely complete and accurate. However, I am inclined to attribute that to the fact that he was the target of an unexpected physical attack and, as well, that there is a certain element of indignation and embarrassment that flows from that, rather than any deliberate untruthfulness.
53  As I will explain later in these reasons, I have misgivings with respect to the extent of the damages that the plaintiff claims to have suffered as a consequence of the assault. However, I am confident that the findings I have made about the specifics of the event are solidly and reliably grounded in a fair assessment of the evidence.
54  As for the testimony of the defendant and his wife, I am unable to accept it in certain material particulars.
55  Firstly, both the defendant and Mrs. Rego say that, after being told the children had been threatened, the defendant went out of his house, through his yard, and onto the property, not angry or upset but, rather, calm and concerned.
56  I am unable to accept that as being true. The fact is, this was the second time that day that the boys had said (probably with a reasonable measure of truth) that they had been given a hard time by a man while they were outside and playing in an area where they (and the Regos) believed they had a right to be.
57  In these circumstances, I have no reservations in concluding that when Mr. Rego went outside to deal with this problem, he was angry. I believe he went out there to confront the problem directly.
58  The evidence of the three eyewitnesses is that the defendant was moving toward the plaintiff quickly and purposefully. One described him as "walking fast"; another described it as "high-stepping." These witnesses also reported that Ms. Rego was not far behind the defendant, seemingly urging him to stop, and that, despite this, he "sucker punched" the plaintiff.
59  Clearly, this testimony is starkly at odds with the defendant's claim that he approached the plaintiff in a restrained way, saying words to the effect of "excuse me, are there problems with the kids?" and that he only resorted to physical force after the plaintiff struck him and directed a racial slur at him. The defendant's description of these events is not only pronouncedly at variance with the other evidence to which I have referred, but it is also at odds with what, given the circumstances of the encounter, common sense would dictate.
60  With respect to the credibility of the defendant, I note that, in cross-examination, he was referred to two statements that he had made in his examination for discovery, statements which he acknowledged to be true, and which were inconsistent with his trial testimony. One of these statements concerned whether he had been injured in the altercation. At trial, he said he had been injured, although not badly. On examination for discovery, he said, in response to the same question "No, I was not."
61  The other statement concerns the defendant's claims regarding what the plaintiff did immediately after the physical altercation ended. At trial, the defendant said that, after the men were back on their feet, he saw the plaintiff reach into his pocket and testified that he thought the plaintiff was drawing a weapon, but that he did not see one. On his examination for discovery, when asked what he thought the plaintiff was actually doing when he reached into his pocket, the defendant replied "drawing a... I have no idea. Actually, I have no idea what he was doing."
62  The testimony of Ms. Rego is also problematic. She says that she did not accompany the defendant as he went out into the field. Instead, she says that she did not get to the men until they were already on the ground, and that she then yelled at them to stop, which they did.
63  This description of events is quite different than the evidence of two of the balcony witnesses. They described her following the defendant as he approached the plaintiff and, according to one of them, urging him to back off or stop. I note as well that the plaintiff testified that he observed both the defendant and the defendant's wife walking toward him.
64  Ms. Rego's evidence is also curious in that she says she told the men to stop, which they did, but then she says that she did not see them stand up. It seems logical to me, given her description of the concern she had about the rather distressing sight of these men struggling on the ground, and the fact that she told them to stop, that she would have seen how matters ended.
65  I accept that witnesses often see matters through their own lens and that their evidence can reasonably be understood to reflect that perspective. However, in this case, I am unable to accept that, in their testimony, the defendant and Ms. Rego accurately described the altercation.
66  I find that Mr. Rego quickly approached Mr. Rycroft and, despite his wife's admonitions, struck the plaintiff, who had done nothing to physically engage with the defendant.
67  There is another aspect of the evidence that merits mention. Both Mr. and Ms. Rego testified that, both before and after the physical altercation, Mr. Rycroft referred to Mr. Rego as a "fucking Hindu." None of the other eyewitnesses, who also appeared to have some reasonable ability to hear what occurred in the course of the incident, had any recollection of that having been said. When asked, Mr. Rycroft denied that he had said any such thing to Mr. Rego.
68  To my mind, that seems to be an odd remark to have been made. Having observed Mr. Rego in the courtroom, I noted nothing about him that would suggest that he has the appearance traditionally associated with people from the Indian subcontinent. I am, of course, assuming that when the defendant said that Mr, Rycroft made this remark, that was the basis of it.
69  I make no finding as to whether such a comment was made. In any event, even if Mr. Rycroft had said such a thing to Mr. Rego, it would not be determinative as to the legal consequences of what occurred.
70  Furthermore, it is, in my view, somewhat telling that it was Mr. Rycroft who called the police, not Mr. Rego. Evidently, it was the plaintiff's view that he had been assaulted and that he was the victim. On the other hand, although Mr. Rego's description of the event would amply support him feeling that he had been quite improperly set upon, physically assaulted, and verbally abused by the plaintiff, a man he had good cause to believe had threatened his son, he testified that he did not take any steps to notify the authorities. While that may have been a not entirely unreasonable choice for him to make, I find it at least somewhat curious that he thought that there would be no reason to notify the authorities or to complain to them that he had been the victim of an assault.
71  I should note that this last observation is not one of the fundamental bases upon which I make my findings. I do not think that the defendant's lack of action is, by any means, determinative of the issue. Instead, it is one of a number of tertiary evidentiary facets which informed my assessment.
72  One final observation I will make is with respect to the size and appearance of the two men. On the one hand, it is true that the plaintiff is a fairly large man. Intending him no disrespect, certainly as he appeared at trial, he seemed quite out-of-shape and lumbering. As well, the evidence is that he was, at the time, not in good health, having recently experienced problems with his heart. In short, while of large size, the plaintiff did not appear to be a man who would be in fighting shape. Mr. Rego is a smaller man, but appears lean, fit and trim. From his testimony, I conclude that he has been involved in coaching youth soccer. Presumably, he is at least somewhat physically active.
73  In terms of apparent capability to handle themselves physically, while my assessment is based on little other than what I have noted, my impression is that it would be wrong to see this as a match where a large and physically able man was bullying a small and vulnerable person.
74  Again, that observation is not the basis for the conclusions I have reached, but offered only to make clear that I have considered that aspect of the matter.
75  In the final analysis, I am satisfied that, on a fair assessment of the totality of the evidence, the conclusions that I have reached with respect to the altercation between these men are reasonable and properly supported by the evidence.
76  Given those findings, I am obliged to consider the defences put forward by Mr. Rego.
77  Shortly put, following from the rather lengthy discussion set out above, I do not believe there is a plausible argument to be made that the plaintiff consented to the altercation. In addition, I reject the submission that the defendant was acting in defence of himself or anyone else.
78  As for provocation, that is not a complete defence. Rather, it is a factor that, if found to be present, can be considered in mitigation of damages. In order for the defendant to be able to invoke the principle of provocation, the court must find that the conduct of the plaintiff caused the defendant to have lost his power of self-control, and that such conduct must have taken place in the immediate context of the assault. It is a recognition that the actions of a plaintiff can sometimes cause a defendant, in the heat of the moment, to take leave of his sense of judgment and act out violently. On this point, this Court recently cited with approval the following passage from Lewis N. Klar, Q.C., Tort Law, 5th ed. (Toronto: Carswell, 2012) in Robinson v. Bud's Bar Inc.,  at para 134:
PROVOCATION
Provocation has been defined as "conduct which caused the defendant to lose his power of self-control, and which occurred at the time of, or shortly before, the tortious act of the defendant." It generally involves insulting or taunting words, or conduct which, although falling short of assault necessitating a defensive reaction, incite the defendant. Because the plaintiff's conduct does not require that the defendant take protective action, but merely provokes an often violent reaction, provocation is not regarded as a complete defence to an intentional tort, nor justification for tortious behaviour. Provocation operates as a type of contributory negligence, mitigating, though not eliminating, the plaintiff's damages.
79  Frankly, it is my view that Mr. Rego was, unfortunately, angry when he approached Mr. Rycroft and decided, rashly, to deal with the person he thought had been acting offensively toward his son and his son's friend. Nothing the plaintiff did immediately before the altercation began can be said to have constituted a provocation of Mr. Rego. As noted above, I find that the defendant was angry when he approached Mr. Rycroft, and that that anger overwhelmed his better judgment, resulting in the assault. What he did was ill-considered and foolish - a brief but quite regrettable event that has had significant regrettable repercussions for all concerned.
80  It follows that I am unable to conclude that the defendant's actions resulted from any provocation on Mr. Rycroft's part.
81  Therefore, in light of all the matters discussed in this section of my reasons, I find that the tort of battery has been made out.
The Claim for Damages
82  The plaintiff claims damages under a number of different heads:
Nonpecuniary damages;
Past income loss;
Loss of earning capacity;
Aggravated damages; and
Punitive damages.
83  In addition, there are two claims advanced on the basis of the following statutes:
Crime Victim Assistance Act, S.B.C. 2001, c. 38; and
Health Care Cost Recovery Act, S.B.C. 2008, c. 27.
Nonpecuniary Damages
84  An assessment of the plaintiff's claim for nonpecuniary damages must begin with this Court's findings regarding the injuries visited upon him by the defendant.
85  The plaintiff is 53 years of age. He is divorced and was, at the time of the incident, living alone in his rented home. He was employed as a long-haul truck driver. As a result of the assault, he claims to have sustained injuries to the following parts of his body:
Both knees;
Right elbow, arm, and hand;
Left eye; and
Jaw.
86  In addition, he says that the events in question have had a serious psychological effect on him. Specifically, he claims that it has changed his personality, making him more withdrawn and depressed.
87  In regards to the plaintiff's claimed physical injuries, the matter of his purported knee injury is by no means straightforward. Supported by the medical opinion of Dr. Shiraz Mawani, who has been his family physician for many years, the plaintiff says that the worst injury he sustained in the event was a contusion to his right knee and a tear in the posterior horn of his right knee's medial meniscus. Mr. Rycroft claims that, as a result of injuries he sustained during the altercation, the knee subsequently required surgical debridement.
88  An x-ray taken of the knee in August 2009, a month after the assault, showed only "minor narrowing of the medial tibiofemoral compartment with minor osteophystosis of the femoral and tibia condyles, in keeping with mild-to-moderate osteoarthritic degenerative changes." However, the plaintiff says that, up to that point, his right knee had been entirely asymptomatic and fully functional. In addition, Mr. Rycroft submits that, despite the suggestion arising from the x-ray that there were only minor changes, the fact is that, as a consequence of the assault, he had severe pain and limitation in his right knee.
89  An MRI was taken of the knee in May 2010. This MRI disclosed a torn medial meniscus and more significant degenerative osteoarthritic changes.
90  The theory of the plaintiff is that the initial mild osteoarthritic changes in the right knee progressed to more severe changes. Ultimately, in March 2011, Dr. Trevor Stone (an orthopedic surgeon) performed an arthroscopy on the right knee.
91  In summary, it is the position of the plaintiff that the injury initially appeared to be minor, but eventually manifested as a significant problem that required surgical intervention and that will likely require further medical intervention, a total knee replacement.
92  In regards to his left knee, in 2006, the plaintiff was involved in a workplace accident that caused a lateral meniscal tear in that knee. That required arthroscopic debridement. An MRI and other investigations taken at the time disclosed a significant osteoarthritic change in both the left knee's medial and patella-femoral compartments.
93  The plaintiff accepts that all of those changes and conditions were not caused by the assault, as they were present before it.
94  Nevertheless, it is the position of the plaintiff that, as a result of the injury to his right knee during the assault, he was forced to place an additional load on his left knee. Consequently, this additional burden led to more wear and tear of his left knee, thereby hastening more severe arthritic changes. The plaintiff says that, while his left knee had been symptomatic prior to the assault, he had nevertheless been mobile and active, able to carry on his ordinary day-to-day activities.
95  It is important to note that Mr. Rycroft had a left knee replacement in October 2015. He was approximately three months in recovery, and testified that the left knee remains symptomatic in that it continues to experience some discomfort and continues to limit his activities.
96  Dr. Stone opines that the osteoarthritis in Mr. Rycroft's right knee is likely to progress and that it is likely that the plaintiff will ultimately require a total right knee replacement.
97  Consequently, the plaintiff says that both his knees are now injured, significantly impacting upon his enjoyment of life, his ability to partake of his usual activities, and to earn an income.
98  In terms of other physical injuries, Mr. Rycroft claims to have sustained a contusion to his right elbow. While that was initially symptomatic and painful, it has essentially resolved.
99  Mr. Rycroft also says that, following the assault, the vision in his left eye deteriorated as a result of the formation of a cataract.
100  Mr. Rycroft was referred to a specialist in ophthalmology, Dr. Gabriel Chu, who performed a left cataract extraction and intraocular lens implantation. Mr. Rycroft's vision in that eye is essentially restored.
101  Dr. Chu testified at trial. He described having performed the cataract surgery on Mr. Rycroft's left eye on January 29, 2013. He examined Mr. Rycroft and found no cataracts in his right eye.
102  The theory of the plaintiff is that the cataract injury was likely the result of the trauma that Mr. Rycroft sustained in the assault. In their opinions, both Drs. Chu and Mawani make reference to the injury being the "likely result of the trauma that Mr. Rycroft sustained in the assault, wherein he was punched repeatedly on the left side of the left eye."
103  Mr. Rycroft also complained of injury to his jaw. He testified that there was discomfort immediately following the altercation, and attributes that soreness to having been choked by Mr. Rego. He reports that the jaw pain went away within a few weeks of the incident in question.
104  In short, the position of the plaintiff is that the injuries which he sustained in the altercation with the defendant have substantially impacted upon a number of aspects of his life, including his everyday enjoyment of life and his ability to function in his employment.
105  I will further discuss the issue of the impact of the injuries upon his working circumstances later in these reasons. For now, I will more directly address his claim that the injuries have had a very significant effect upon him in terms of pain, suffering, and loss of enjoyment of life.
106  The defendant submits that there is a substantial body of evidence which should cause of this Court to have grave misgivings about Mr. Rycroft's claims concerning the extent and effect of his injuries.
107  In the course of a rigorous cross-examination, a number of propositions were put to Mr. Rycroft, particularly with respect to instances of prior injury and claims that he made respecting those.
108  His prior work history was also examined in careful detail.
109  As noted, the evidence establishes that, in 2006, Mr. Rycroft sustained an injury to his left knee in a workplace accident. As a consequence, he took time off and had medical treatment.
110  In cross-examination, it was put to the plaintiff that on July 6, 2009, four days before the incident in question, he had contacted a representative of WorkSafe BC to make inquiries about an injury to his left knee. The record to which counsel made reference in the course of cross-examination indicated as follows:
Worker advised two days after he returned to his job he was laid off work. He is having ongoing problems with his left knee, going down the stairs and he is limping on it.
He is having a hard time finding work as he is a truck driver and is inquiring if retraining is possible.
He will be following up with his doctor to have a report sent in.
111  When queried at trial about this contact, Mr. Rycroft downplayed its significance. He testified that he did not recall saying that it was an ongoing problem or that he had reported that he was limping.
112  It is to be noted that, following the event at bar, the plaintiff continued to work at his job for a further 2 1/2 weeks, at which time he stopped.
113  Also of significance, it seems to me, are the steps that the plaintiff took following the altercation to seek medical attention for the injuries that he says he sustained.
114  The attendances and notations, as reflected in the clinical notes, are contained in Dr. Mawani's report. They read as follows:
23 July 2009:
Patient presented again for soreness of the left knee. He indicated that it had continued ever since the arthroscopy in September 2006. He was limping on it. Then he cracked and occasionally felt unstable. It swelled. He was unable to walk any distance or ride a bike. He was frustrated and wanted it fixed. Apparently he had been off work for one and 1-1/2 years prior and had started driving a truck 3 weeks previously.
12 August 2009:
Patient was seen for the first time following an ASSAULT which had taken place on July 7, 2009. Apparently a male person a jumped on his back, had his neck in an elbow lock and he was choking. His left knee, which was usually sore, had given out and he fell onto his right knee and right elbow onto hard dirt. The knee had swollen up and had been sore since. He had also been punched on his left temple, quite out of the blue.
The knee pain was mainly in front of the knee around the patella, spreading down the front of the right leg to above the ankle and, as wel,l [sic] behind the knee in the popliteal fossa.
Examination showed no effusion or bruising. Patient was extremely sensitive to flexion and extension of the knee and very tender in the patellar tendon and lateral tibial condyle. He was tender along the lateral aspect of the right leg along the tibia. Hyperextension was very painful.
115  There are a number of entries which follow. They disclose that the plaintiff saw Dr. Mawani an additional four times in 2009. The principal notation in those visits is with respect to complaints of right knee pain.
116  Having examined the documented medical history and the trial evidence regarding it, taken in conjunction with the plaintiff's work records and in the context of his trial testimony, I find myself unable to glean a clear picture of his circumstances.
117  The conclusion that I take is that, prior to the events of July 10, 2009, his work history had been somewhat sporadic and uneven. At the time of the altercation, he had been working at his job as a driver with LA Transport for only a matter of two or three weeks. As best I can discern, prior to that, he had not worked between September 2008 and June 2009.
118  I also conclude that, as detailed above, he had been in contact with WorkSafe BC to report problems with his left knee just days prior to the altercation.
119  The timing and manner in which the plaintiff sought medical attention as a consequence of the altercation is, in my view, somewhat curious in light of his claim of having sustained acute physical injuries.
120  In the result, I have a degree of reservation about whether the substantial physical injuries and their effect which Mr. Rycroft ascribes to the altercation meet the standard of proof that must be attained.
121  I believe that Mr. Rycroft's prior left knee condition was symptomatic at the time of the event, and was of sufficient seriousness to constitute meaningful interference with his ability to work. I also find that that condition was a substantial factor affecting his long-term vocational fitness.
122  There is no doubt that he sustained some physical injury in the altercation, but it was not of the degree of seriousness that he urges this Court to find.
123  The defendant is responsible for the harm and injury that his unlawful act caused. However, in determining the damages he must pay, the Court is required to make proper allowance for those conditions that were pre-existing and were not caused by the conduct of the defendant. On this point, the Supreme Court of Canada stated the following in Athey v. Leonati,  at para. 32:
32 ... The essential purpose and most basic principle of tort law is that the plaintiff must be placed in the position he or she would have been in absent the defendant's negligence (the "original position"). However, the plaintiff is not to be placed in a position better than his or her original one. It is therefore necessary not only to determine the plaintiff's position after the tort but also to assess what the "original position" would have been. It is the difference between these positions, the "original position" and the "injured position", which is the plaintiff's loss...
[Emphasis in original]
124  The challenge in this case is to fairly and properly determine the damages for which the defendant is responsible.
125  This task is made more difficult by the fact that the plaintiff's pre-incident history is neither clear nor straightforward. As well, as noted above, it is questionable whether he is able to provide accurate and reliable testimony.
126  That is not to say that I am concluding that the plaintiff has been deliberately untruthful in his testimony. However, the fact remains that some of the details of his employment and medical circumstances are unclear and somewhat confusing. He has shown himself to be an unreliable historian. In addition, as witnessed by the plaintiff's employment history, there seems to be a tendency on his part to seek benefits on the basis that he is unable to maintain employment.
127  Given the onus that rests upon the plaintiff to prove his claim, these deficiencies must necessarily impact this Court's assessment.
128  I find that the defendant's assault upon Mr. Rycroft injured the left side of his head, causing a laceration and bruising. Moreover, Mr. Rycroft sustained some soft tissue injuries to his arm, elbow and hand, but I find those to be of a relatively modest severity. As a result, I find that no ongoing effect has been proven.
129  The assault also injured the plaintiff's left eye which subsequently required cataract surgery. This matter has caused me some concern. There was a substantial passage of time between the incident and the operation that Dr. Chu performed. As well, in attributing the cause of the condition to the assault, both Dr. Chu and Mawani make reference to "repeated punches to the left side of the left eye." As my findings indicate, I am not satisfied that there were multiple punches, although there was certainly one. However, upon reflection, I accept that the plaintiff has proven, on a balance of probabilities, that the injury to his eye resulted from the defendant's blow. That said, I also find that that injury has substantially resolved.
130  In regards to the plaintiff's knees, I find that the event resulted in some meaningful injury to the plaintiff's right knee. I am satisfied that there was pre-existing degenerative change present in the right knee, but that it was not symptomatic prior to the altercation. I find that the injury he sustained to the right knee during the altercation resulted in the onset of significant pain that has required medical intervention, including an arthroscopic medial meniscectomy. That procedure has not, and will not, provide full relief from the pain, stiffness and decrease of function that attends the condition. Mr. Rycroft will require a total replacement of his right knee and, in fact, at the time of trial, that replacement was scheduled to be done fairly imminently. Those consequences are attributable to the battery.
131  As for the left knee injury, I find that that was a pre-existing and symptomatic condition. Consequently, the defendant does not bear responsibility for it.
132  With respect to the contention of the plaintiff that the injury to his right knee has resulted in aggravation to his left knee, and that it has caused unusual wear and deterioration to his hip, I reject those claims as unproven. In this regard, I rely upon the evidence of Dr. Stone, whose opinion I consider to be the most authoritative on the matter.
133  I accept that the injuries he sustained caused him some pain, suffering, and diminishment of enjoyment of life, including feelings of despondency and a concern for being secure in his own home. Certainly, some of those effects continue to some degree and will be present going forward.
134  With respect to determining a monetary value of damages to compensate the plaintiff for those nonpecuniary losses, both the plaintiff and the defendant have provided submissions as to an appropriate quantum. These submissions have been supported by reference to other court decisions that each party says validates their respective positions.
135  The plaintiff acknowledges that, prior to the event in question, he had various health concerns, including a serious injury to his left knee resulting from the accident in 2006 for which he had undergone surgery. He concedes it was still symptomatic prior to the battery. He also acknowledges that he had suffered from a heart arrhythmia. At the time of the battery he was 57 years old and was active to some extent. He maintained his own home and assisted his mother at hers.
136  Mr. Rycroft says that he is been diligent in following the advice given to him by the medical professionals he has seen, and has taken the medications prescribed to him. He attended at physiotherapy. He underwent arthroscopic surgery to repair the medial meniscus of his right knee and underwent a total left knee replacement. He intends to have a total right knee replacement.
137  Mr. Rycroft says that, despite his best efforts, his quality of life has been markedly diminished.
138  In the plaintiff's submission, an appropriate award for nonpecuniary damages in this case is in the order of <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage>. He relies on the following cases; a common theme in them is knee injury:
Tchir v. South Coast British Columbia Transportation Authority, ;
Majchrzak v. Avery, ;
Thomasson v. Moeller, ;
Zhang v. Graham, ;
Reddy v. Staples, ;
Kathuria v. Wildgrove, ; and
Graham v. Lee, .
139  The defendant says that the plaintiff's injuries are modest and submits that an appropriate award is in the range of <damage type = "other">$8,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$10,000</damage>. In short, he says that there is insufficient evidence to establish that any morphological changes to Mr. Rycroft's right knee were caused by the incident. He says that, at most, the incident caused an exacerbation of knee pain that would have occurred in the absence of the incident. In addition, he says that the left knee was symptomatic prior to the incident and the elbow pain was not reported until some two months after the incident. Similarly, the defendant takes the position that the plaintiff has not satisfactorily established that the altercation caused any harm to his vision.
140  In the defendant's submission, the following cases are supportive of his position:
Ross v. Dhillon, ;
Gatzke v. Sidhu, ;
Chrisgian v. Hatzisavva, ;
Manering v. Imanian et al, ; and
Khodadoost v. Wittkamper, .
141  In my view, there were real injuries sustained by Mr. Rycroft. However, for the reasons I have set out, the extent of what he has proven does not warrant damages in the order of the quantum he seeks. In determining what I consider to be an appropriate award of damages, I have taken into account the disruption that these events have caused in his life, and that there will be further discomfort, particularly because of the pain and attendant disruption that will result from the knee replacement that will be required. I conclude that an appropriate award is <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$70,000</damage>.
Past Income Loss
142  A plaintiff is entitled to recover damages to compensate him for past income loss resulting from the defendant's wrongful conduct. As explained by the BC Court of Appeal in Rowe v. Bobell Express Ltd.,  at paras. 30-31:
[30] Thus, in my view, a claim for what is often described as "past loss of income" is actually a claim for loss of earning capacity; that is, a claim for the loss of the value of the work that the injured plaintiff would have performed but was unable to perform because of the injury.
[31] Evidence of this value may take many forms. As was said by Kenneth D. Cooper-Stephenson in Personal Injury Damages in Canada, 2nd ed. (Scarborough, Ont.: Carswell, 1996) at 205-06,
... The essence of the task under this head of damages is to award compensation for any pecuniary loss which will result from an inability to work. "Loss of the value of work" is the substance of the claim -- loss of the value of any work the plaintiff would have done but for the accident but now will be unable to do. The loss framed in this way may be measured in different ways. Sometimes it will be measured by reference to the actual earnings the plaintiff would have received; sometimes by a replacement cost evaluation of tasks which the plaintiff will now be unable to perform; sometimes by an assessment of reduced company profits; and sometimes by the amount of secondary income lost, such as shared family income.
[My underscoring; other emphasis in original]
143  In this case, Mr. Rycroft's historical employment was principally as a truck driver and an equipment operator. In 2006, he sustained an injury to his left knee which interfered with his ability to work. In 2007, he experienced a heart arrhythmia which prevented him from working until 2008. In fact, he had returned to work only three weeks prior to the incident at bar.
144  Following the assault, Mr. Rycroft worked for a further two or three weeks and then was out of work until late in the year.
145  Over the subsequent years, up to trial, he worked sporadically. There were some years that he had no income at all.
146  Mr. Rycroft submits that an appropriate means of quantifying the damages he has sustained under this head is to go forward on the premise that he would be capable of earning <damage type = "other">$45,000</damage> each year. He proposes that the Court would then subtract from that amount what his actual earnings were for the respective years in issue. The calculation that he advances is as follows:
147  In the result, the plaintiff seeks an award of <damage type = "other">$195,545</damage> for income loss to the date of trial.
148  In my respectful view, that approach to the analysis is not warranted in the circumstances. I consider it necessary in making this assessment to take into account the problems that he was having with his left knee, including that, at the time of the incident, he was actively pursuing compensation and suggesting that he was unable to continue working. There were also other medical issues, namely his cardiac condition, plus the fact that his employment history is sporadic and uneven.
149  In the final analysis, it is my view that an appropriate award of damages to compensate the plaintiff for his loss of income prior to trial, due to the conduct of the defendant, is substantially less. I find an appropriate award to be <damage type = "past wage loss">$100,000</damage>.
Loss of Earning Capacity
150  The general principles that apply when determining a plaintiff's loss of earning capacity were outlined succinctly by the BC Court of Appeal in Villing v. Husseni,  at paras. 17-20:
Legal Principles Governing an Award for Loss of Earning Capacity
[17] In order to receive an award for loss of earning capacity, a plaintiff must prove a real and substantial possibility that his or her earning capacity has been impaired: Perren v. Lalari,  at paras. 30-32 [Perren]. If the plaintiff has discharged the burden of proof, then the judge must turn to an assessment of damages. The assessment may be based on an earnings approach or a capital asset approach: Perren at para. 32. An earnings approach is most appropriate where the loss is more easily quantifiable. In general, a party may be forced to default to a capital asset approach where the loss is not easily quantifiable.
[18] Using the capital asset approach does not mean the assessment is unstructured. Garson J.A.'s observations in Morgan v. Galbraith,  are apposite:
[56] If the assessment is still to be based on the capital asset approach the judge must consider the four questions in Brown in the context of the facts of this case and make findings of fact as to the nature and extent of the plaintiff's loss of capacity and how that loss may impact the plaintiff's ability to earn income. Adopting the capital asset approach does not mean that the assessment is entirely at large without the necessity to explain the factual basis of the award: Morris v. Rose Estate (1996),  (BC CA),  at para. 24, ; Mulholland (Guardian ad litem of) v. Riley Estate (1995),  (BC CA),  at para. 43, .
[Emphasis added.]
[19] In every case where the capital asset approach is adopted, the four questions in Brown v. Golaiy (1985),  (BC SC),  at para. 8 (S.C.), form the basis of the assessment. The questions are whether:
The plaintiff has been rendered less capable overall from earning income from all types of employment;
The plaintiff is less marketable or attractive as an employee to potential employers;
The plaintiff has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities which might otherwise have been open to him, had he not been injured; and
The plaintiff is less valuable to himself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market.
[20] The considerations in Brown are not intended to be exhaustive: Sinnott v. Boggs,  at para. 9, per Mackenzie J.A.
151  As of the date of trial, Mr. Rycroft is 63 years of age. He testified that he would like to continue to work as a long-haul trucker up until the age of 70. He says that he is aware of others in the industry who have done so.
152  On that basis, his submission is that the Court should calculate the value of his loss as being the present value of five years of future income at <damage type = "other">$45,000</damage> per year, for a total of <damage type = "other">$215,217</damage>. Alternatively, he submits that, if the Court was to use a capital asset approach, then an award of two years income at <damage type = "other">$45,000</damage> per year or <damage type = "other">$90,000</damage> would appropriate.
153  Again, with respect, I am unable to accept those submissions as reasonable. Given Mr. Rycroft's employment history, and taking into account the other relevant considerations relating to his health that were unrelated to the conduct of the defendant, I am quite sceptical that Mr. Rycroft would have continued to work regularly at that job until his late 60s.
154  Using the capital asset approach, it is my conclusion that the appropriate award under this head is <damage type = "future wage loss">$45,000</damage>.
Aggravated and Punitive Damages
155  The plaintiff seeks additional awards under the heads of aggravated and punitive damages. The Supreme Court of Canada distinguished these two types of damages in Vorvis v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia,  at para. 16:
[16] Before dealing with the question of punitive damages, it will be well to make clear the distinction between punitive and aggravated damages, for in the argument before us and in some of the materials filed there appeared some confusion as to the distinction. Punitive damages, as the name would indicate, are designed to punish. In this, they constitute an exception to the general common law rule that damages are designed to compensate the injured, not to punish the wrongdoer. Aggravated damages will frequently cover conduct which could also be the subject of punitive damages, but the role of aggravated damages remains compensatory. The distinction is clearly set out in Waddams, The Law of Damages (2nd ed. 1983), at p. 562, para. 979, in these words:
An exception exists to the general rule that damages are compensatory. This is the case of an award made for the purpose, not of compensating the plaintiff, but of punishing the defendant. Such awards have been called exemplary, vindictive, penal, punitive, aggravated and retributory, but the expressions in common modern use to describe damages going beyond compensatory are exemplary and punitive damages. "Exemplary" was preferred by the House of Lords in Cassell & Co. Ltd. v. Broome, but "punitive" has also been used in many Canadian courts including the Supreme Court of Canada in H.L. Weiss Forwarding Ltd. v. Omnus. The expression "aggravated damages", though it has sometimes been used interchangeably with punitive or exemplary damages, has more frequently in recent times been contrasted with exemplary damages. In this contrasting sense, aggravated damages describes an award that aims at compensation, but takes full account of the intangible injuries, such as distress and humiliation, that may have been caused by the defendant's insulting behaviour. The expressions vindictive, penal and retributory have dropped out of common use.
Aggravated damages are awarded to compensate for aggravated damage. As explained by Waddams, they take account of intangible injuries and by definition will generally augment damages assessed under the general rules relating to the assessment of damages. Aggravated damages are compensatory in nature and may only be awarded for that purpose. Punitive damages, on the other hand, are punitive in nature and may only be employed in circumstances where the conduct giving the cause for complaint is of such nature that it merits punishment.
156  When assessing these types of damages, the BC Court of Appeal has made it clear that courts should consider aggravated damages before considering punitive damages: Huff v. Price,  (BCCA). Consequently, I have followed that structure in my decision.
157  On the matter of aggravated damages, it is my view that the issue of intangible injuries was substantially addressed in the award of nonpecuniary damages. While the plaintiff seeks an award under this head in the amount of <damage type = "other">$10,000</damage>, it is my conclusion that an appropriate sum is <damage type = "aggravated">$2,500</damage>.
158  In regard to punitive damages, Mr. Rycroft seeks an award under this head of damages in the amount of <damage type = "other">$15,000</damage>.
159  Before outlining my findings on this head of damages, it is important to further set out the law concerning punitive damages. Courts have made it clear that these damages apply when the defendant's conduct was especially malicious, and that such damages are not meant to be compensatory. On this point, the Supreme Court of Canada said the following in Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto,  at para 196:
Punitive damages may be awarded in situations where the defendant's misconduct is so malicious, oppressive and high-handed that it offends the court's sense of decency. Punitive damages bear no relation to what the plaintiff should receive by way of compensation. Their aim is not to compensate the plaintiff, but rather to punish the defendant. It is the means by which the jury or judge expresses its outrage at the egregious conduct of the defendant. They are in the nature of a fine which is meant to act as a deterrent to the defendant and to others from acting in this manner. It is important to emphasize that punitive damages should only be awarded in those circumstances where the combined award of general and aggravated damages would be insufficient to achieve the goal of punishment and deterrence.
160  In Bowen Contracting Ltd. v. B.C. Log Spill Recovery Co-operative Association,  at para. 23, the BC Court of Appeal summarized the following ten principles which the Supreme Court of Canada found, in Whiten v. Pilot Insurance Co., , to apply when considering punitive damages:
Punitive damages are not limited to particular "categories" of wrongs, although by their nature they will "largely be restricted to intentional torts";
The general objectives of punitive damages are punishment, deterrence of the wrongdoer and others, and denunciation;
Since the primary vehicle of punishment is criminal law, punitive damages should be resorted to only in "exceptional cases and with restraint";
The use of pejoratives such as "high-handed" or "oppressive" does not provide useful guidance (or discipline) to judges or juries and a more principled approach is desirable. (Notwithstanding this, the Court said at para. 94 that punitive damages are to be imposed only if there has been "high-handed, malicious, arbitrary or highly reprehensible misconduct that departs to a marked degree from ordinary standards of decent behaviour.");
In setting punitive damages, the court should ask itself "in particular" how an award would further one or other of the objectives of the law and what is the lowest award that would serve the purpose;
It is "rational" to use punitive damages to relieve a wrongdoer of its profits where compensatory damages would amount to "nothing more than a licence fee to earn greater profits through outrageous disregard of the legal or equitable rights of others."
A "formulaic" approach should be avoided. The court should focus not on the plaintiff's loss but on the defendant's misconduct;
The overall award should be rationally related to the objectives for which punitive damages are awarded;
Juries should receive more help from judges concerning the function of punitive damages and factors governing such awards and the assessment of a proper amount;
Punitive damages are not "at large" and an appellate court may intervene if an award exceeds the outer boundaries of a rational and measured response to the facts of the case.
161  In addition, as outlined in Home Equity Development Inc. v. Crow,  at para. 179, the proper award of punitive damages must be proportionate to the following factors:
The blameworthiness of the defendant's conduct; including
whether the misconduct was planned and deliberate
the intent and motive of the defendant
The degree of vulnerability of the plaintiff.
The harm or potential harm specifically directed at the plaintiff.
The need for deterrence.
Taking into account the other penalties, both civil and criminal, which have been or which are likely to be inflicted on the defendant for the same misconduct.
The advantage wrongfully gained by the defendant from the misconduct.
162  In my respectful view, while the conduct of the defendant was undoubtedly wrong and warrants sanction, I must also take into account that what occurred was in the nature of a foolish loss of temper and acting out. On the basis of my findings, Mr. Rego was angry at what he considered to be harsh treatment of his son. He confronted the party he thought was responsible and did so in an unacceptable way.
163  At the same time, this was not a planned, deliberate and calculated attempt to physically assault another person.
164  While I accept that it would be well within the realm of reason to impose punitive damages, I also take into account the findings that I have made in this case, together with the very substantial awards of damages that I have outlined above. Consequently, I find that adding punitive damages to those awards would constitute adding to what is already a very significant sanction upon Mr. Rego in circumstances where I do not expect that he will be able to rely on any insurance policy to satisfy the damages award.
165  There is no question that this Court's findings of the defendant's responsibility and the damage awards made will impose a substantial financial hardship upon him and constitutes a serious censure of his conduct.
166  In my view, this is an appropriate case in which to decline to make any award under this head of damages.
Crime Victim Assistance Act and Health Care Costs Recovery Act
167  The plaintiff briefly noted that he had received a <damage type = "other">$36,833.42</damage> award through the operation of the Crime Victim Assistance Act. The Director of the Crime Victim Assistance Program has asserted a subrogated claim for this amount.
168  In addition, Mr. Rycroft notes that the Minister of Health, moving under the Health Care Costs Recovery Act, has provided a Minister's Certificate dated June 6, 2016 claiming the return of <damage type = "other">$5,783.45</damage> in healthcare costs provided to him. The plaintiff claims that these costs were incurred as a result of the injuries he sustained during the altercation.
169  Neither of the parties provided substantive submissions on these two recovery claims. Similarly, in Mittenen v. Dudley,  [Mittenen], the Court said the following at paras. 84-85:
[84] During the submissions there was reference to claims for subrogated costs under the Health Care Recovery Act or for Victim Services. However, the submissions I received in that respect were incomplete.
[85] As requested I will allow liberty to make further submission on the question of subrogated claims, provided that an application to deal with that is initiated within 30 days. That is by request to the trial scheduling manager to make further submissions. Submissions may be submitted in writing on a schedule that I will set if a request is made for further submissions. If counsel wish as well to have an oral hearing, they may so indicate in the written submission, or they may indicate that they are content to simply make written submissions.
170  Given the parties' lack of submissions on this point, I believe that the Court's approach taken by the court in Mittenen should also be adopted here.
171  If the parties wish to have me make a determination on these recovery claims, then they have 30 days from the date of the release of this decision to put in a request to trial scheduling to make further submissions. However, in these circumstances, I will only allow written submissions.
Conclusion
172  In summary, I have determined that the plaintiff has succeeded in making out his claim for battery. The defendant is liable to Mr. Rycroft for the injuries he suffered as a result of the altercation.
173  I have assessed Mr. Rycroft's award of damages as follows:
Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$70,000</damage>;
Past Income loss: <damage type = "past wage loss">$100,000</damage>;
Loss of earning capacity: <damage type = "future wage loss">$45,000</damage>;
Aggravated Damages: <damage type = "aggravated">$2,500</damage>; and
Punitive Damages: Nil
 Total: <damage type = "total">$217,500</damage> 
In addition, he is entitled to recover pre-judgement interest on the damages that were awarded for his past income loss.
174  Upon receipt of further written submissions by the parties, I will deal with the matter of any additional awards determinations regarding the Crime Victim Assistance Act and Health Care Costs Recovery Act claims.
J.W. WILLIAMS J.
End of Document
Roger Garside Construction Ltd. v. Stirling, [2013] B.C.J. No. 1777
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Victoria, British Columbia
J. Steeves J.
Heard: May 27, 28 and June 24-27, 2013.
Judgment: August 13, 2013.
Docket: 11-2035
Registry: Victoria
[2013] B.C.J. No. 1777   |   2013 BCSC 1457   |   24 C.L.R. (4th) 165   |   231 A.C.W.S. (3d) 952   |   2013 CarswellBC 2431
Between Roger Garside Construction Ltd., Plaintiff and Rew Harvey Stirling and Karolyn Christine Jones, Defendants
(235 paras.)
Case Summary
Construction law — Contracts — Building contracts — Types of contracts — Cost plus contract — Formation — Consensus ad idem — Terms — Estimates — Action by plaintiff builder for lien for monies allegedly owing under contract for renovation work on defendants' home allowed — Counter-claim by defendants for breach of contract and negligence dismissed — Parties disagreed about amount of estimate and whether it was cost-plus or fixed-price contract — There was no evidence of preset price or quotation about cost, which supported conclusion work would be done on cost-plus basis — Plaintiff had not agreed project could be completed for $90,700 and it was probable he had provided quote of 187,010 — $189,788 — Plaintiff was entitled to lien of $223,178.
Construction law — Payment — Owner's right to set-off against — Action by plaintiff builder for lien for monies allegedly owing under contract for renovation work on defendants' home allowed — Counter-claim by defendants for breach of contract and negligence dismissed — Parties disagreed about amount of estimate and whether it was cost-plus or fixed-price contract — There was no evidence of preset price or quotation about cost, which supported conclusion work would be done on cost-plus basis — Plaintiff had not agreed project could be completed for $90,700 and it was probable he had provided quote of 187,010 — $189,788 — Plaintiff was entitled to lien of $223,178.
Construction law — Liens — Right to lien — Action by plaintiff builder for lien for monies allegedly owing under contract for renovation work on defendants' home allowed — Counter-claim by defendants for breach of contract and negligence dismissed — Parties disagreed about amount of estimate and whether it was cost-plus or fixed-price contract — There was no evidence of preset price or quotation about cost, which supported conclusion work would be done on cost-plus basis — Plaintiff had not agreed project could be completed for $90,700 and it was probable he had provided quote of 187,010 — $189,788 — Plaintiff was entitled to lien of $223,178.
Action by the plaintiff builder for a lien for monies allegedly owing under a contract for repair and renovation work on the defendants' home. Counter-claim by the defendants for breach of contract and negligence, including failure to properly manage the project. There was no written contract. The parties disagreed about the scope and cost of the work and whether it was a cost-plus or fixed-price contract. The plaintiff argued the contract was a cost-plus agreement, with a 12 per cent management fee. The plaintiff claimed $234,398; the defendants asserted nothing was owed. The defendants' evidence was that in December 2009 the plaintiff estimated the costs of renovation to be $200,000 -- $250,000. On June 24, 2010, the defendants paid $246,000 under a series of preliminary fixed-priced contracts and one cost-plus contract. The next discussion of contracts was on July 29, 2010, at which time the plaintiff wanted to change the ongoing contract to a cost-plus agreement and the defendants initially agreed. The defendants claimed the plaintiff quoted them a cost of $90,700 to complete the project, which constituted a fixed-price agreement, starting July 29. The defendants relied on an itemized list, with figures supplied by the plaintiff and on letters from the plaintiff's counsel that stated a quoted amount of $90,000 was based on estimates of the work requested to that point. The plaintiff denied quoting this amount and asserted the contract began June 24, and included work done from February to May 2010. The plaintiff had also provided the defendants with a printout regarding the total, unpaid project costs on July 29, which alone were over $90,000. The plaintiff relied on his day timer entry on that day that noted a quote of $187,010 -- $189,788. In December 2010, the plaintiff submitted an invoice for $185,154. The defendants asserted the defendant's management fee had been left open and there were also numerous deficiencies in the work. 

HELD: Action by plaintiff allowed.
 Counter-claim by defendants dismissed. There was some understanding between the parties work was to continue after the June 24 invoice; that was the staring date for the disputed contract. As there was no evidence of a preset price or quotation about cost, the circumstances supported a conclusion that the work would be done on a cost-plus basis. There was also at least acquiescence by the defendants that the work included from February to May 2010 would be paid for and this was also part of the cost-plus contract. The letters of the plaintiff's counsel did not support the conclusion the plaintiff had agreed the cost of completing the project would be $90,000. It was more likely than not that the plaintiff had made the entry regarding the quote of $187,010 -- $189,788 on July 29. The list relied on by the defendants was not accurate as to costs. Further, the defendants had failed to adequately review or understand the outstanding costs information from the plaintiff on July 29. The plaintiff had not agreed the project could be completed for $90,700 and it was probable he had provided a quote of 187,010 -- $189,788. Given the defendants had experience with a management fee of 12 per cent on their previous cost-plus agreement, it was likely they were aware it would also apply to the disputed contract. The final December invoice did not end the plaintiff's obligation to address deficiencies. A total of $9,160 in deficiencies were the plaintiff's responsibility. The plaintiff was not negligent in failing to keep high-standard records, or in his management of the project. The lien had not been filed late. The plaintiff was entitled to a lien of $223,178, plus pre- and post-judgment interest.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Builders Lien Act, (1), s. 1(2), s. 1(3), s. 20
Court Order Interest Act, , s. 8
Counsel
Counsel for Plaintiff: N.W. Lott.
Counsel for Defendants: A.P.M. Berns.
[Editor's note: A correction was released by the Court August 16, 2013; the changes has been made to the text and the correction is appended to this document.]
Reasons for Judgment
J. STEEVES J.
Introduction
1  The plaintiff did some repair and renovation work on the defendants' home in 2010. There were five previous fixed-price contracts and one cost-plus contract between the parties, and there is no issue in this claim on those contracts. A subsequent, seventh contract is very much in dispute. The parties now disagree about the scope and cost of the work as well as whether it was a cost-plus or fixed-price contract. There was no written contract or other written evidence of what was agreed.
2  The plaintiff originally sought a declaration that he is entitled to a lien pursuant to the Builders Lien Act, R.S.B.C. 1997, c. 45 (BLA), in the amount of $228,197.93 against the lands and premises owned by the defendants, among other remedies. At trial the claim was $234,398.03 for materials, labour, a management fee of 12% and taxes. The defendants counterclaim for breach of contract and negligence, including failure to properly manage the project.
3  According to the plaintiff, it had a cost-plus agreement with the defendants to do repairs and renovations to the defendants' home. All of the work was authorized and known to the defendants as was a management fee of 12%. Any deficiencies, as alleged by the defendants, were not significant (such as dust on windows) or they arose because the defendants terminated the contract, thus preventing the plaintiff from completing the project. The amount owed by the defendants became due and owing on October 12, 2011, but the defendants have paid nothing.
4  The defendants' opening and evidence accepted that there was a cost-plus agreement for the work in dispute. In argument, however, they submitted it was a fixed-price contract. With respect to any management fee, it is submitted by the defendants that the plaintiff agreed to forgo that fee until the end of the project and then the defendants could pay what they considered appropriate. They also say that they needed cost certainty; a budget was agreed to and then exceeded by the plaintiff by a significant margin. They were never told the project was over budget and they were not regularly invoiced. Further, the plaintiff failed to properly manage the project, was negligent in performing the work and did not hold sub-trades responsible for damage they caused. Finally, there were deficiencies and some work was not completed at all.
5  The defendants submit that when the agreed contract price is considered with the deficiencies (and with unspecified damages in negligence), they owe no money to the plaintiff.
Background
General
6  The plaintiff, Roger Garside Construction Ltd., is owned and controlled by Roger Garside. He has been in the construction industry for about 47 years. For the last 15 to 20 years he has done renovations and additions on custom homes. I will refer to Mr. Garside as representing the plaintiff. Neither he nor his company has had to come to court before to collect on an account.
7  Mr. Garside, through his company, manages 15 to 20 projects per year; some of them are small and some are in the order of millions of dollars. In general he manages the flow of work and ordering of materials as well as working with engineers and inspectors. The actual work is done by subcontractors that are appropriate for each job. One of the subcontractors is Mr. Garside's son.
8  The plaintiff does work by means of two kinds of contracts. The first is a fixed-price contract whereby the plaintiff prepares estimates or quotations for work on a particular job and then has an agreement with the owner of a property to do the work for a specific price. The second kind of contract is a cost-plus contract. In that case the costs of the materials and subcontracted labour are paid by the owner and the owner also pays a percentage to the plaintiff for managing the contract. The percentage can range from 10% to 15% depending on the size of the contract. A significant amount of the plaintiff's work is done on the basis of cost-plus contracts, sometimes it is 100%.
9  Mr. Garside uses a day timer book to keep track of various tasks in his work. It includes reminders written by Mr. Garside, measurements he has taken, orders he needs to make, phone numbers of subcontractors, some costs, customers and various other matters. As will be seen, it is not a complete or detailed record of all of the work done by Mr. Garside or all of the information related to that work. The plaintiff puts considerable weight on one entry in the day timer as demonstrating a quotation of the cost of the work. This information was only available one week before trial, and it was not available during discovery.
10  Andrew Stirling, one of the defendants, is a helicopter pilot. He has no construction experience to speak of. His work as a helicopter pilot is on a Monday to Friday basis, during the day. On occasion he has to stay overnight when he is travelling for work. Karolyn Jones, the other defendant, works for the Canadian Coast Guard as a Staff Officer. She had some minor construction experience in the past. The two defendants have lived as husband and wife since about 2005.
11  In late 2009, the defendants purchased a new home on Birch Road in the District of Saanich. The defendants remained in their previous home on West Saanich Road until August 2010 while repairs and renovations were completed in the Birch Road property. The latter are the subject of this litigation.
12  According to Mr. Garside's day timer, he met with Ms. Jones at the Birch Road property on November 21, 2009. At that time the defendants were considering buying the property. They wanted to discuss the repairs that would be necessary and they wanted to make some changes. It is agreed that Mr. Garside was asked by Ms. Jones for an estimate of the work and his estimate was $200,000 - $250,000. This figure is not recorded in Mr. Garside's day timer or in any other documents.
13  Over the next few days and into December 2009 there were more meetings and discussions between Mr. Garside and the defendants. Some of these took place at the Birch Road property, some took place at the defendants' West Saanich Road property and others took place in local restaurants. There are detailed lists of various tasks in Mr. Garside's day timer on December 11 and December 12, 2010. On December 12, 2010, there is a note, "160 K Birch Rd." In Mr. Garside's evidence he could not recall the significance of this note.
14  The parties then agreed on five fixed-price contracts on the Birch Road property. They are as follows, according to the dates of the invoices from the plaintiff (the estimates were the same amounts as the ultimate invoice amounts and the dates of the estimates are in brackets):
January 8, 2010 (remove stucco from garage): $7,665.00 (December 16, 2009).
January 8, 2010 (remove exterior cladding and sunroom from house): $45,748.50 (December 16, 2009)
February 16, 2010 (repair rot damage in garage): $2,730.00 (January 15, 2010).
February 16, 2010 (repair rot damage in-house): $28,245.00 (January 15, 2010).
June 24, 2010 (Windows and stucco replacement): $157,720.50 (March 10, 2010).
15  The date of the last of these invoices, June 24, 2010, is of some significance, as discussed below.
16  The defendants also asked the plaintiff to do some work on the West Saanich Road property to get it ready for selling. Mr. Garside sent a crew over and the work was done quickly. The work was billed to the defendants on a cost-plus basis on March 9, 2010. The invoice of that date was for $4,224.42, including a management fee of 15%. There was no estimate for this contract in evidence. The final invoice included a work sheet with the materials and subcontracts listed. The defendants testified that they did not know about the management fee until they received the invoice.
17  For the most part, the above five fixed-price contracts and one cost-plus contract work were completed without any problems, and the defendants promptly paid the amounts owing to the plaintiff. As an example, for the cost-plus contract for work at West Saanich Road, Ms. Jones testified that she was pleased with the work and "happy" to pay the invoice because the work was done quickly and it helped with the sale of the West Saanich property.
18  It is the subsequent arrangement between the parties that is in dispute. The parties have very different versions of the facts of that arrangement, including details of some of the above events and the facts of other events. As well, whether their contractual arrangement was on a cost-plus or fixed-price basis became an issue in argument. I will begin with the plaintiff's version of what occurred and then I will set out the defendants' version.
Plaintiff's evidence
19  As above, Mr. Garside met with Ms. Jones for the first time at the Birch Road property on November 21, 2009.
20  They walked around the property and through the house. Mr. Garside testified that overall the house was in a "leaky condo" situation. There was rot in some of the exterior walls and there had been water damage to the interior wood floors. He was asked for and he provided an estimate of $200,000 - $250,000 for the work that was discussed. He then met with both defendants, and they ultimately agreed on the five fixed-price contracts and the one cost-plus contract. Work proceeded on the Birch Road property with the knowledge of the defendants and the five fixed-price contracts there were completed without any problems.
21  The work on the Birch Road property continued after June 24, 2010, the day the last fixed-price contract was invoiced and paid. According to Mr. Garside, this work was done on the basis of a cost-plus contract that started in June 2010, perhaps May 2010. In his mind it coincided with the end of the last fixed-price contract for the work on the Birch Road property. As below, the defendants say the date was July 29, 2010, and it was a fixed-price contract.
22  Mr. Garside explained in his evidence why the parties proceeded on the basis of a cost-plus contract. He testified that the work on the Birch Road property had come to a stage where there were a number of decisions to be made about floor tiles, fixtures and other things. These required a lot of detail and choices about what, for example, fixtures would be used. Mr. Garside also testified that the defendants were busy, as was he, and everyone felt that the previous contracts had worked well. He suggested a cost-plus contract for the further work because it gave the defendants freedom to select or not select items as the job evolved and blocks of work could be done separately. There was more than one meeting to discuss this idea, according to Mr. Garside. He estimated 10 to 20 meetings over all.
23  According to Mr. Garside, he discussed this with Ms. Jones and she said that his proposal made sense, the parties agreed to proceed on this basis and they agreed to a 12% management fee as well. There is no written contract to this effect, there are no letters, emails or other correspondence, nor is there any reference to a cost-plus agreement in Mr. Garside's day timer. He explained this by saying that, as a result of their previous dealings, the defendants trusted him and he trusted them. Mr. Garside agreed in his evidence that the defendants were concerned with cost.
24  There were a number of meetings to make decisions about various issues such as tiles, painting and landscaping. According to Mr. Garside, there was a lot of talk about costs and he always brought a summary of the costs to date for the defendants to see. There were no invoices from the plaintiff, and there is no evidence that the defendants asked for more information or objected to the cost until as discussed below. The defendants did ask Mr. Garside from time to time if he needed payments, but he declined those offers. Other than the evidence above, there is no other information in Mr. Garside's day timer about costs. As well, as will be seen, the parties do not have clear memories of all of their conversations, in particular the dates and the particulars of those meetings.
25  The defendants retained a designer who prepared reports and options in May 2010. Mr. Garside testified that many changes were made by the defendants after that date including selection of tiles and paint, wood floor, carpet, living room fireplace and a number of others. He also said that he thought that November 10, 2010, was the date when the work on the Birch Road property was substantially complete although there were still some things left to do that were "not minor." These included a countertop in the kitchen and problems with the cabinets.
26  There was an important meeting on July 29, 2010, in which the work was discussed and, according to Mr. Garside, he advised the defendants that the cost would be between $187,010 and $189,788. In his day timer for July 29, 2010, these figures are noted beside "Quoted to Andrew." The plaintiff places considerable weight on this note. It also includes a list of the following work items: flooring, concrete, ceilings, light fixtures, septic, excavating, wiring, flooring and tile, labour, "move pole" and drainage.
27  The plaintiff's day timer was not available for discovery but it was an outstanding request by counsel for the defendants at the end of discovery. However, the request was not recorded by the court reporter, and the absence of the day timer was not noticed by counsel for both parties until one week before trial. At that point the document was disclosed and, for the first time, the quote of $187,010 - $189,788 was known to all. This included Mr. Garside as he had not mentioned the quote in discovery. He testified that a lot of things became known when the day timer was disclosed. The information recorded by Mr. Garside in his day timer is very much in dispute.
28  At the meeting on July 29, 2010, Mr. Garside presented a printout of the costs to that date. This was a 13 page document itemizing the subtrades, materials, permits and the cost for each item. The total cost was $253,757.51. On the front page of this document are two handwritten notes. The first says "meeting" and the second is "$63,969.33." The plaintiff's bookkeeper, Cathy Ogilvie, testified that she made these notes on the document but she could not recall in her evidence why she wrote them.
29  At the meeting the defendants wrote notes on their copy of the printout on the back page including a list of work items totaling $90,700. This is discussed below in detail, but the defendants claim there was agreement on a cost of $90,700 to "get them in their house." In his evidence Mr. Garside said that he never mentioned that figure at the meeting; instead he gave them the above range of $187,010 to $189,788. Further, he testified that he told the defendants that some invoices had not yet been recorded on the printout and some further work that had been discussed was to be completed. It follows from this that the total of $253,757.51 did not represent what the plaintiff said the defendants owed; the amount owed was, according to Mr. Garside, in the range of $187,010 - $189,788 plus any outstanding invoices (plus a management fee and taxes).
30  According to the evidence of Mr. Garside, Mr. Stirling said at the July 29, 2010, meeting he was hoping that the defendants would not have to spend that much money; i.e. $187,010 - $189,788. However, Mr. Garside testified that he was instructed to carry on with the work and if there were any ways to save money, the defendants would like to do that. Mr. Garside also testified that Mr. Stirling said that, when the West Saanich Road house was sold, there would be enough money to complete the project the way the defendants wanted it completed. This latter conversation may have taken place at a later date.
31  Work on the Birch Road property proceeded and the defendants moved into the Birch Road property on August 20, 2010.
32  There was another meeting in November 2010 between Mr. Garside and Mr. Stirling (the parties differ on the date, it may have been November 11 or 19, 2010). Mr. Garside presented a cost summary of numerous pages. This included some of the costs for the previous fixed-price contracts, and Mr. Garside testified that it would now take "considerable work" to calculate the amount owing by the defendants on November 19, 2010, under the cost-plus contract in dispute. He testified that the amount owed was approximately $180,000 at that time, and he told Mr. Stirling this and that there were more bills to come. According to Mr. Garside, Mr. Stirling said that the amount owing was too much and Mr. Garside would have to come and speak to both defendants to explain the costs. In discovery Mr. Garside said the amount discussed as owing was about $150,000. The actual cost printout from this meeting is not available.
33  Mr. Garside was asked in cross-examination whether Mr. Stirling said at this November 2010 that the amount claimed was not what was agreed. Mr. Garside answered that he did not know if Mr. Stirling used those exact words and then he said that Mr. Stirling may have said that the defendants did not agree on that amount. Mr. Garside was also asked whether Mr. Stirling was shocked by the amount claimed, and Mr. Garside replied that Mr. Stirling was unhappy and he said "something like we hoped it would come in less than that", in Mr. Garside's words.
34  A subsequent meeting took place on December 4, 2010. According to Mr. Garside, this was when "things fall apart." There is an entry in Mr. Garside's day timer that suggests that the meeting took place at 10 AM, and in his evidence he said he believed that the meeting took place in the morning. There is another cost summary sheet dated November 29, 2010, and it is likely that Mr. Garside took this to the meeting. This was a 10 page document with a total of $148,115.61. There is another handwritten document prepared by Ms. Ogilvie, the plaintiff's bookkeeper. This is a one-page document showing a total of $185,154.57 as owing by the defendants. A management fee was not included, and Mr. Garside testified that this was done to resolve the contract with the defendants.
35  Mr. Garside testified that the defendants were unhappy, rather than shocked, with this amount. The defendants said at the December 4, 2010, meeting that they would not pay the amounts presented by Mr. Garside. To this, according to Mr. Garside's evidence, he replied that this was the last thing he wanted to happen and he thought that a solution could be found. He asked the defendants what amount they thought was fair. According to him, they replied that they would pay $110,000 and he said he could not accept that.
36  The defendants then said, according to Mr. Garside, that he should take the $110,000 because in one week their offer would be reduced to $90,000 and the following week it would be reduced to $80,000. Mr. Garside refused. He agreed that the defendants wanted finality and he testified that he wanted finality as well. At the December 4, 2010, meeting the defendants raised an issue about the hardwood floors. Mr. Garside offered to take care of the repair cost because he wanted to resolve the situation and he was prepared to, as he testified, take "a bit of a loss." The meeting ended when Mr. Garside was told there would be no payment, Ms. Jones left the room and Mr. Garside was asked to leave.
37  Mr. Garside testified that he decided to leave the issue of costs for a while and look after completing a number of small things on the project. He apparently thought that with the passage of time the issue of cost would resolve. He agreed that the defendants may have called him on February 23, 2011, and offered $110,000 to settle his account.
38  On April 12, 2011, previous counsel for the plaintiff sent a letter to counsel for the defendants. It was signed by Kristen Collishaw, articled student. Among other things the letter says:
The figure of $91,000 that our client quoted in July, 2010 as the projected cost of completing the interior renovations was based on the work that Mr. Stirling and Ms. Jones requested at that point in time. . . .
39  At trial the plaintiff objected to the admissibility of this letter on the basis that it contained discussions between counsel about settlement. I denied the plaintiff's objection on the basis that, although it was in the context of settlement discussions and it did include information about settlement, it also contained a factual assertion that, on its face, appeared to contradict a fact asserted by the plaintiff in the trial. The plaintiff then called Ms. Collishaw as a witness; she is now a lawyer. Her evidence is discussed below.
40  On October 12, 2011, the plaintiff sent to the defendants an invoice in the amount of $238,627.55 for materials and subcontractors from June 30, 2010. Mr. Garside testified that a cost summary would have been sent with this invoice. It was sent some time after the commencement of this action.
41  At trial the plaintiff submitted 108 invoices for materials and labour, beginning February 26, 2010. Mr. Garside testified that these represented the materials and labour for the plaintiff's work at the defendants' Birch Road property. They total $206,627.32. The plaintiff's claim is for this amount, plus a management fee and plus taxes. The total of all costs claimed by the plaintiff at trial is $234,398.03.
Defendant's evidence
42  I next turn to the evidence of the defendants. Mr. Stirling provided the more lengthy evidence.
43  He and Ms. Jones began looking for property sometime in 2009. After looking at a number of properties they settled on the Birch Road house, the subject of the dispute in this case. However, it obviously needed repairs and they wanted some advice about the repairs, including costs, before they made an offer. They were also interested in making some changes to the house. Ms. Jones telephoned Mr. Garside to ask him if he could provide this advice because she had seen the signs for his company in the area.
44  Ms. Jones met Mr. Garside at the Birch Road property on November 21, 2009, late in the morning. Ms. Jones agreed that Mr. Garside's day timer correctly recorded the date although she said they met at 11:00 AM rather than the previously arranged 10:00 AM. There is an arrow in the day timer that is consistent with this.
45  They walked around and inside the house (it was empty) for about 1.5 hours. Ms. Jones testified there were a lot of repairs needed on the house and it was an odd design; "very chalet-ish", as she put it. There was water damage, all the windows needed to be replaced, the kitchen was old and narrow, all the cabinets needed to go, the upstairs fireplace was not working, the bathrooms were old and the fixtures were chipped, there was a hole in the ceiling of one of the bedrooms from water damage, the windows in the sunroom were fogged up and the concrete floor had sunken, all the patios needed to be replaced and there were other problems. She discussed these with Mr. Garside and she asked him for an estimate of the cost for the repairs they discussed. He said $200,000 - $250,000. They did not look at the garage but they agreed that it would require work as well.
46  The defendants testified that the working budget they had for the purchase was $850,000 (Ms. Jones thought it was $750,000 - $850,000) because this was an amount that they could service a mortgage on. Mr. Stirling explained that Ms. Jones liked Mr. Garside, she thought he could do the work that they wanted done and she arranged for a meeting with Mr. Stirling, Mr. Garside and her. In the meantime the defendants had made an offer on the Birch Road property and it had been accepted. The purchase price was $575,000 (the 2013 assessed value is $1,026,000).
47  Mr. Stirling could not remember the date of this meeting but he agreed it was in December 2009. His reference point was the possession date for the Birch Road property of December 16, 2009. The purpose of the meeting was for Mr. Stirling to meet Mr. Garside and to begin a discussion about the work. Mr. Stirling testified that his memory is that the work included new windows, flooring, changes to the kitchen, changes to the interior, patios, stucco (house and garage), and the roof. The defendants had in mind an open interior concept so that they were wondering about removing a wall between the dining room and kitchen and making more access to the family room. As well, the existing furnace was in a small room near the front door and they wondered about opening it up and relocating the furnace. As Mr. Stirling put it in his evidence, it was "basically a whole renovation of the house."
48  Further, Mr. Stirling testified that the discussion was "not so much about details, we were looking for the big picture." Later in his evidence, Mr. Stirling said that Mr. Garside did not break down the various parts of the project when he was discussing it with the defendants. Mr. Garside either offered or he was asked for a cost estimate for the work and he said it would be in the range of $200,000 - $250,000. Mr. Stirling could not remember any other meetings in December 2009; he agreed with Mr. Garside's evidence that there were about 10 to 20 meetings in all. At this same meeting, according to Ms. Jones, the idea of cost-plus contracts was discussed and she said she did not want to proceed on that basis.
49  The parties then agreed to the five fixed-price contracts described above as well as the one cost-plus contract, also discussed above. There were meetings in December 2009, January and into March 2010 about these contracts. The work under these contracts was completed and paid without any apparent difficulties. In his evidence Mr. Stirling said that, with respect to the cost-plus contract above that was a result of the defendants asking Mr. Garside to do some work to get the West Saanich Road house ready for sale. Mr. Stirling testified that the defendants did not know it was to be on a cost-plus basis or that there would be a management fee of 15%. Ms. Jones agreed with this but she was "happy" to pay the invoice because the work had been done quickly to help with the sale of the West Saanich Road property, she did not notice the management fee until later and the amount of the invoice was reasonable.
50  Mr. Stirling described the next discussion about cost with Mr. Garside as occurring on June 24, 2010. This was around the plaintiffs invoice of the same date with respect to the fixed-price contract $157,720.50. The defendants had paid $110,000 on account and they immediately paid the balance owing.
51  Mr. Stirling testified that there may have been some additional work done that was not included in the June 24, 2010, invoice. He could not say for certain and he was "not keeping any records about how the job was proceeding." Mr. Stirling could not "guess" if any work had been going on between June 24 and the next meeting on July 29, 2010. Sometimes he and Ms. Jones would go by the property and see progress was being made; other times nothing seemed to have changed.
52  Mr. Stirling described in his evidence what he called "direct contracts" for a number of things that the defendants contracted directly with suppliers or contractors, rather than paying the plaintiff. These included kitchen cabinets, countertops, lighting fixtures and appliances. The total cost for these items was approximately $60,000.
53  The defendants also testified about design issues and choices the defendants made during the project. These were times during the project when Mr. Garside would say that it was necessary to make a selection about something and the defendants would go to a supplier and make the selection. An example of this is electrical fixtures, and Mr. Stirling stated that he and Ms. Jones made this selection in one day. According to Mr. Stirling, virtually all of these selections were made before the invoice was submitted for the previous cost-plus contract on June 24, 2010. The defendants hired a design consultant and she produced a number of documents dated in May 2010. According to Mr. Stirling, the defendants did not use her after that date or make many changes to the project. Similarly, the defendants used a landscape consultant recommended by Mr. Garside and that work was done in January and February 2010. Other design issues and choices involved the outside patios and sunroom, the driveway and the garden beds. There were small things completed afterwards such as extending the length of the sidewalk because it had not been poured to the plans of the landscape consultant.
54  Early in the discussions between the parties there was the prospect of the defendants buying a boat owned by Mr. Garside, and he took the defendants on a cruise in it in February 2010. It was priced at around $100,000. They were thinking about Mr. Garside's estimate of $250,000 for the work on the Birch Road property, and, on that basis, the defendants thought they would have money available at the end of the work on the Birch Road house to buy the boat. When the defendants received the final fixed-price contract of $157,720.50 on March 10, 2010 (as above), the defendants realized that they could no longer consider buying the boat. Mr. Stirling also testified that at this point (March 2010) the defendants knew that their original budget price had nearly been met.
55  On July 29, 2010, the defendants and Mr. Garside met at a restaurant. Mr. Garside was not sure what time of day it was but he thought his day timer record of a morning meeting was the time. In contrast, Mr. Stirling had medical appointments in the morning, and he testified that the meeting could not have happened before noon.
56  At the July 29, 2010, meeting Mr. Garside presented a printout of the work and materials to that date. This was the 13 page document with a job total of $253,757.51. According to Mr. Stirling, no particular explanation was given for the costs or this amount or the fact that the defendants had already paid approximately $242,000 under the previous contracts. Mr. Garside did not request payment for the total of the worksheets or payment for any amount. Nor did he say how much was owed by the defendants.
57  However, according to Mr. Stirling's evidence, Mr. Garside advised the defendants at the meeting that he had just lost $3,000 on a previous fixed-price contract and he now wanted to change the arrangement he had with the defendants to a cost-plus contract. As above, Mr. Garside testified that the agreement on a cost-plus contract took place in June 2010, perhaps May 2010.
58  Mr. Stirling described Mr. Garside's costs as surprising and unexpected. He testified that most of the time at the meeting of July 29, 2010, was spent on the issue of a cost-plus contract rather than on the 13 page worksheet. The defendants were two weeks away from being able to move in to their Birch Road property and, according to Mr. Stirling, they did not feel they had any choice. Therefore they agreed to a cost-plus contract but they insisted on cost certainty. Mr. Stirling also testified that, with respect to any management fee, Mr. Garside said that it could be 10% or 5% or 0%; the defendants could decide at the end of the job what percentage to pay. This was done because, according to Mr. Stirling, of the defendants "obvious reluctance" to enter into a cost-plus arrangement, to use Mr. Stirling's words. They preferred a fixed-price contract.
59  Mr. Stirling testified that nobody was being very clear at the July 29, 2010, meeting about how to complete the work and he started to make specific suggestions. He described a list that he and Ms. Jones wrote on the last page of the July 29, 2010, cost sheet and on the back of that page. The list on the back of the last page was primarily written by Mr. Stirling and I reproduce it as follows:
Rock Chimney
Penn Plum Fixtures
 EST ACTUAL 
 Handrails $2500 
 Floor $25,000 
Wood
Carpet
Tile
 Bath Towels, $700 
 holders Etc.  
 Blinds 10K 
 Bathroom Door Glass ? 
 Lighting $2200 
 Mirrors $1000 
 Countertops $10,000 
 Kitchen Cabinetry $20,000 
 Excavating $4000 
 Drainage $5000 
 Concrete $6000 
 Pagoda $3000 
 Plumb Fixtures $7200 
 Door Hardware $700 
 [ineligible] Doors $2500 
 Vacuum $900 
$90,700
Monies
$360,000
-$254,000
$106,000
-$90,700
$15,300
60  In his evidence Mr. Stirling said that the items on the left-hand side of the list were the items that needed to be completed to finish the job. These were discussed with Mr. Garside. The cost for countertops ($10,000) and kitchen cabinetry ($20,000) were to be paid directly by the defendants to the contractors for those items and the pagoda ($3,000) was never built. Ms. Jones confirmed this in her evidence.
61  The numbers under the heading "EST" were provided by Mr. Garside. The total of $90,700 was calculated by Mr. Stirling. He testified that he asked Mr. Garside whether the amount of $90,700 was "the cost it would take to get us into the house." Mr. Garside agreed to this, according to Mr. Stirling. The calculation at the top right, "MONIES", was Mr. Stirling's. He used the amount of $360,000 as the amount available to the defendants, he deducted a rounded up amount of $254,000 (from the worksheets) and then deducted the amount of $90,700. The balance of $15,300 "showed" the defendants that they had enough money to do the job. On this basis, as explained by Mr. Stirling in his evidence, they instructed Mr. Garside to go ahead. Mr. Garside was not taking notes, nor did he have his day timer with him at this meeting, again according to Mr. Stirling.
62  As above, Mr. Garside's day timer for July 29, 2010, says that the amount of $187,010 to $189,788 was "Quoted to Andrew." Mr. Stirling denied in his evidence that Mr. Garside gave that quote on July 29, 2010. Further, according to Mr. Stirling, the first time he learned of that amount was a week before this trial commenced in May 2013 when he had the opportunity, through his counsel, to see a copy of Mr. Garside's day timer. As above, this document had been requested in discovery but, through an error of the court reporter, the request was not recorded in the transcript.
63  The next meeting of significance according to Mr. Stirling was one held in a restaurant in November 2010. He met with Mr. Garside without Ms. Jones. At this meeting Mr. Garside presented another worksheet showing the defendants owed about $152,000. According to Mr. Stirling he was "visibly shocked" with this number, and he asked Mr. Garside to take it back, to check his numbers and to prepare another worksheet that was consistent with their previous conversation on July 29, 2010. That new worksheet was to be presented to Mr. Stirling and Ms. Jones at another meeting. Mr. Stirling could not remember the reasons given by Mr. Garside for the cost of $152,000. He did recall that Mr. Garside was "blaming" Ms. Jones for all the changes she made. To this Mr. Stirling asked Mr. Garside not to speak badly of Ms. Jones.
64  The next meeting was held on December 4, 2010, with both defendants and Mr. Garside. Mr. Stirling testified that Mr. Garside presented a one-page handwritten document with the current costs on it. It showed that the defendants owed $185,154.57 for material, labour and taxes.
65  Mr. Stirling testified that there was "no mistaking" that he and Ms. Jones were "dumbfounded" because the amount was supposed to be less than $152,000 and now it was $30,000 more than what was discussed recently. The defendants asked how this could be possible. Mr. Stirling testified that Mr. Garside "talked a lot" but Mr. Stirling could not recall Mr. Garside's reasoning. Mr. Stirling also testified that Mr. Garside was not making any sense. In addition, Mr. Stirling said that the one-page document presented by Mr. Garside at the July 29, 2010, meeting did not include any management fee because Mr. Garside said he was forgoing that fee.
66  The defendants agreed that the meeting ended when Ms. Jones left the room. However, according to Mr. Stirling, there was still room for discussion and negotiation. They deny they told Mr. Garside that they would not pay him anything. Mr. Stirling also denied in his evidence that the defendants said at any meeting, or in any conversation, that Mr. Garside should accept the $110,000 because the following week the offer would be $90,000 and the week after that it would be $80,000. At the December 4, 2010, meeting Mr. Garside asked what amount could the defendants pay that day, and Ms. Jones testified that thought that she did not want to give him anything. She also testified that Mr. Garside suggested that the defendants "pay what we had and then go into personal debt with him" for the balance. She found this upsetting and left the meeting to go upstairs.
67  Mr. Stirling testified that, after the meeting on December 4, 2010, things remained amicable with Mr. Garside. For example, in December 2010 the defendants needed help installing a new fridge that was to be delivered. Mr. Stirling "felt comfortable", as he put it, calling Mr. Garside and asking him to help, which he did (and he was paid by the supplier).
68  On February 23, 2011, Mr. Stirling telephoned Mr. Garside to offer $110,000 to settle the defendants' account. Mr. Garside declined this offer. Mr. Stirling wrote a note about the conversation on the back of the worksheet described above (that has the cost at $90,700). Mr. Stirling also recorded that Mr. Garside told him in this conversation that he wanted to make sure that the Birch Road house was right for the defendants. Mr. Stirling presented this as a positive statement from Mr. Garside.
69  As above, the defendants have been in their Birch Road home since August 2010. Mr. Stirling testified about a number of deficiencies as a result of the work of the plaintiff. These are discussed in more detail below. In summary they include cupping of the wooden floors, damage to the exterior stucco, problems with the stain on the front door, nail pops and cracks in the drywall, gaps in the molding on the exterior of the windows, screen doors that do not open or do not open properly, problems with the in-floor heating in the bathroom, problems with flashing around skylights and coldness and drafts in the closet in the master bedroom. Photographs of some of these issues were entered in evidence. As well, the defendants hired another contractor to repair some deficiencies and record others that still need repairing. This contractor also testified.
70  There is also the issue of what type of contract was in place after June 24, 2010. Mr. Stirling emphasized that the defendants did not agree to a cost-plus contract until July 29, 2010. As above, Mr. Garside testified that the cost-plus arrangement began in June 2010. Mr. Stirling was also concerned that the defendants never received a written estimate of the cost of the work to be done and they were not told how frequently they would be billed. And he denied, as asserted by Mr. Garside, that the defendants agreed that any of the work or materials prior to July 29, 2010, were to be included in the cost-plus contract that commenced on that date. In her evidence, Ms. Jones was asked in cross-examination about the nature of the contract between the parties after the meeting on July 29, 2010, and she ultimately agreed it was a fixed-price contract.
71  Finally, according to Mr. Stirling the defendants expected to be in the Birch Road house in March or April 2010. However it was not until August 2010 that this happened. Mr. Stirling testified that Mr. Garside did not raise the issue of the late occupancy: he also could not specifically recall asking Mr. Garside about it. And, at times Mr. Garside was unavailable to the defendants because he was at his vacation property in the interior or he was working on other projects.
Claim and counterclaim
72  On May 13, 2011, the plaintiff filed its notice of civil claim.
73  The relief sought includes a declaration that the plaintiff is entitled to a lien against the Birch Road property in the amount of $228,197.93 (as above, at trial the plaintiff seeks $234,398.03, composed of materials, labour, a management fee of 12% and taxes). Other relief claimed includes an Order that the defendants pay the amount claimed and, in default, an Order that the property be sold to realize the amount of the claim.
74  A counterclaim was filed by the defendants on June 10, 2011.
75  The defendants' allege in their counterclaim that the plaintiff failed to properly manage the project and this resulted in damage and loss. Further, the work performed by the plaintiff resulted in damage and loss to the defendants, and the plaintiff owed the defendants a duty to complete the work in a professional and workmanlike manner. The plaintiff failed in this duty and did not meet the industry standards required for the performance of this duty. The relief sought by the defendants includes damages for breach of contract, a claim of set-off and other relief.
76  In a response to the counterclaim, filed June 10, 2011, the plaintiff stated, among other things:
The Plaintiff denies that the parties agreed that the cost of completing the project would not exceed $90,000. This figure was an estimate that the Plaintiff provided to the defendants as the cost of the project based on the scope of the work requested by the Defendants at that point in time. . .
77  The legal basis of the plaintiff's response on the counterclaim was the BLA, the law of contract and the law of quantum meruit.
Expert evidence
78  The defendants obtained an expert opinion from a document examiner with regards to the statement in the plaintiff's day timer on July 29, 2010, "Quoted to Andrew $187,010 - $189,788 flooring - flooring and tile . . ." This was described as "exhibit Q1" in the examiner's report.
79  The document examiner was J.M. Kovacs and his report is dated June 10, 2013. Mr. Kovacs worked for many years with the RCMP doing examination of documents, he has lectured on the subject and he has been an expert witness in this and other courts. Mr. Kovacs was not cross-examined.
80  The purpose of his examination was to "To conduct an examination of the question entry on exhibit Q1 with respect to the probability of the entry being made at the same time as the surrounding entries." The line quality of the entry in question was analyzed and Mr. Kovacs described "a freely and clearly written entry with a good overall line quality which means that the physical conditions would have been a stable surface for the book to rest on and ample arm support for the writing."
81  Mr. Kovacs conclusion was as follows:
I am not able to determine the sequence that the question entry was made on July 29, 2010... or the correctness of the indicated time of the entry. The question handwritten entry shows all the features normally associated with a carefully executed handwriting.
Analysis
82  The issues in this case are largely factual ones relating to the nature of the contract between the parties, the cost of the work under that contract, the cost of management fees and the cost of any deficiencies. There are also issues relating to the defendants' allegation of negligence against the plaintiff, the timeliness of the plaintiff's filing of a lien and issues about pre and post-judgment interest.
83  I begin by identifying some facts that are not in dispute and others where I have identified the different positions of the parties:
The defendants purchased a new home on Birch Road. The possession date was December 16, 2009, and they moved into the home on or about August 20, 2010. They had been living in another home on West Saanich Road before moving to Birch Road. The former home was sold in the summer of 2010.
The Birch Road home required extensive repairs and the defendants wished to make changes as well. These were reviewed generally with the plaintiff in November 2009, before the home was purchased, and the plaintiff estimated that the cost would be $200,000-$250,000.
The plaintiff contracted with the defendants to repair and renovate the Birch Road home by means of five fixed-price contracts. The defendants agreed to these contracts on the basis of detailed quotations of the work and prices. The total cost of these five contracts was $242,109.00
The plaintiff also contracted with the defendants to work on the West Saanich Road home to get it ready for sale. This was by means of a cost-plus contract that included a management fee of 15%. The invoice for this contract included a printout of the costs for materials and labour. The cost of this contract was $4,224.42.
There were no problems between the parties with regards to these contracts. Indeed, as Ms. Jones testified with regards to the cost-plus contract, the defendants were pleased with the work and "happy" to pay the plaintiff for the work. The total cost of the above six contracts was $246,333.42.
The parties agreed on a second contract with regards to further work on the Birch Road house. The plaintiff believes that this contract started in June 2010, possibly even May 2010 but the defendants say that it started on July 29, 2010 at a meeting that day.
The plaintiff is clear this was a cost-plus contract. In their opening and evidence the defendants agreed it was a cost-plus contract. However, during argument they changed their position and submitted that it was a fixed-price contract.
There were meetings between the parties on costs on July 29, 2010, in November 2010, and on December 4, 2010.
At no point did any of the parties say that the work was over budget until November 11, 2010, or that the work should stop for that reason.
Mr. Garside had a day timer that included some information about his dealings with the defendants. On July 29, 2010, it has the note "Quoted to Andrew $187,010 - $189,788", and Mr. Garside testified that he said that to the defendants on that date. The day timer was not available until after discovery and Mr. Garside did not explain the quote for $187,010 - $189,788 until after the day timer was disclosed, a week before trial. The defendants deny that the quote of $187,010 - $189,788 was given on July 29, 2010.
The defendants took notes at the meeting of July 29, 2010. These include a list of work items to be completed with cost figures beside them. The total is $90,700. They say Mr. Garside agreed to complete the work for that amount. Mr. Garside denies he said that at the meeting on July 29, 2010.
There is no other written record of the discussions or agreements between the parties after June 24, 2010, the date the last fixed-price contract was completed and paid.
On October 11, 2011, the plaintiff sent an invoice to the defendants in the amount of $238,627.55. This included management fees of $23,140.98 (at 12%), taxes and costs for materials and subcontractors.
The defendants allege deficiencies in the work of the plaintiff and that all of the contracted work was not completed by the plaintiff. They also allege negligence on the part of the plaintiff. The plaintiff denies there were deficiencies or that it was negligent.
84  I now turn to the issues in dispute between the parties: the nature of the contract between them; the cost and scope of the work; any management fee; any deficiencies; negligence; the timeliness of the filing of the lien; and the issues of pre and post-judgment interest.
The contract
85  There are two issues with respect to the contract between the parties I will attempt to address here: when did the contract commence; and was it a fixed-price or cost-plus contract? I will deal with the issue of cost, including whether the contract included a management fee, separately below.
86  There is disagreement between the parties about when the contract in dispute commenced. Mr. Garside testified that it started about the end of June, when the last fixed-price contract was completed. That contract was invoiced and paid on June 24, 2010. In contrast the defendants submit that it started on July 29, 2010, when they met with Mr. Garside and, as they contend, agreed on the contract price of $90,700. Again, there is no written document to explain the date the contract started.
87  The difficulty with the July 29, 2010, date as the commencement of the contract is that there is no question that work on the Birch Road property continued after June 24, 2010. Mr. Garside testified that a cost-plus contract (as he described it) started about June 24, 2010, but it may have also started in May 2010. The defendants simply deny that there was any discussion about a contract until July 29, 2010. However, on June 24, 2010, the work that the defendants wanted done on the Birch Road property was not complete, and it carried on for at least one month prior to the July 29, 2010 meeting with the knowledge of the defendants. In his evidence Mr. Stirling agreed that the work on the Birch Road property carried over past the end of the last fixed-price contract in June 2010.
88  I conclude that there was some understanding or acquiescence around June 24, 2010, that the work would continue and would be paid for. It may have been that the previously successful contracts between the parties led them to simply carry on the work with the expectation that it would be paid for. That approach has obviously created difficulties for both parties; their lack of communication has contributed greatly to the problems in this case. It may also have been, as Mr. Stirling said in his evidence, that the defendants at least were just looking at the "big picture." In any event, I find that there was a contractual relationship between the parties on or about June 24, 2010.
89  What then was the contractual relationship on or about June 24, 2010?
90  In this litigation the parties initially agreed that the contract in dispute between them was a cost-plus one. Both parties presented their evidence on that basis. This would have been the second such contract after the cost-plus contract for the work on the West Saanich Road house in March 2010 to get that house ready for sale. That contract was completed and paid without any difficulties.
91  The dispute over the nature of the contract after June 2010 arose in evidence. The defendants had always asserted that, in their dealings with the plaintiff, they wanted cost certainty and, in fact, the plaintiff agreed that costs were always an issue. The problem arose because the evidence of the defendants was that the agreement was a cost-plus contract (as of July 29, 2010) but with a fixed-price of $90,700 and with a fixed list of work to be done. When pressed on this in cross-examination it was accepted that the contract they had in mind was really a fixed-price one. Then, in argument, the defendants submitted that the work done was pursuant to a fixed-price contract, contrary to their opening. The plaintiff says the contract was a cost-plus one.
92  There is no disagreement as to what a cost-plus contract is and what a fixed-price contract is. The former has been defined as "A contract to sell a product or perform work for the selling price or contractor's cost-plus a percentage or plus a fixed fee." A fixed-price contract is a "Contract in which the price is preset regardless of the actual cost" (Daphne Dukelow, Pocket Dictionary of Canadian Law, 3rd ed.(Toronto: Carswell, 2002). These definitions accord with the way the parties acted with the five fixed-price contracts and one cost-plus contract they previously completed with success.
93  Therefore, it is necessary to review what occurred between the parties between June 2010 and the end of 2010, in particular what happened on July 29, 2010.
94  First, on or about June 24, 2010, I find that there was an understanding or acquiescence that the work on the Birch Road property was not complete. Further, it would continue and it would be paid for. There was no preset price or quotation about cost that is in evidence. I conclude that the circumstances at this time support a conclusion that the work would be done on a cost-plus basis.
95  Another aspect of the contract between the parties beginning June 24, 2010, is that some work claimed by the plaintiff took place before that date, including work in February, March, April and May 2010. That is, work that might be expected to have been included in the five fixed-price contracts for the Birch Road property is being claimed by the plaintiff as part of the cost-plus contract that was in place from about June 24, 2010. The defendants oppose this claim and disagree they accepted or agreed to this. However, the work continued and, if there was not an express agreement, there was at least acquiescence that the work would be paid for by the defendants. I conclude that the cost for this work was part of the cost-plus contract between the parties.
96  There is then the meeting of July 29, 2010. The defendants now submit that the contract they had with the plaintiff was a fixed-price contract: it was for a fixed cost ($90,700) and for a fixed list of work items. In contrast, the plaintiff says the relationship continued as a cost-plus contract. I pause to note that there is no reason in law why parties cannot change their contract from a cost-plus one to a fixed-price one, or vice versa. The question is whether that happened on July 29, 2010.
97  It is clear that the defendants believed on July 29, 2010, that they had cost certainty by getting an agreement on the amount of $90,700. On the other hand the plaintiff's position is that, on July 29, 2010, a quote of $187,010 - $189,788 was given. Mr. Garside testified this quote was not a preset price but it was an amount that provided some cost certainty to the defendants.
98  The issue of whether the parties had a fixed-price or cost-plus contract is intricately related to what happened on July 29, 2010, and whether the plaintiff agreed to a fixed-price contract in the amount of $90,700 or whether the defendants agreed to a cost-plus contract with a quoted cost of $187,010 - $189,788.
99  I now turn to that issue.
Cost
100  As above, it is agreed that on November 20, 2009, at a first meeting between Mr. Garside and Ms. Jones at the Birch Road property, Mr. Garside was asked for an estimate of the cost of the work discussed and he replied with an estimate of $200,000 - $250,000.
101  The parties then entered into the five fixed-price contracts and one cost-plus contract, which totalled $246,333.42. The last of these contracts ended on or about June 24, 2010, when the defendants paid a total of $157,720.50 for the last fixed-price contract on the Birch Road property. If the cost of the work on the West Saanich Road property ($4,224.42) under the cost-plus contract is deducted from the total cost (because Mr. Garside's estimate in November 2009 related only to the Birch Road property), by June 24, 2010, the defendants had paid to the plaintiff an amount of $242,109.00 for work on the Birch Road property.
102  I therefore conclude that there can be little doubt that the defendants knew that the original estimate of $200,000 - $250,000 for the work on the Birch Road property was met in June 2010. A simple addition of the contracts to that date would have demonstrated that fact.
103  I also conclude that, after June 24, 2010, the defendants accepted that the work would continue and the cost would increase beyond the original estimate of $200,000 - 250,000. Clearly the scope of the work expanded from the original discussion in November 2009, it continued after June 24, 2010, and somehow it had to be paid for. The heart of the dispute between the parties on cost is how much more than the original estimate of $200,000 - $250,000 is to be paid by the defendants.
104  This came to a head on July 29, 2010, when, according to the defendants, the amount of $90,700 was agreed at a meeting in a local restaurant. On the other hand, Mr. Garside says he "quoted" the amount of $187,010 - $189,788. Both parties have documents that they say support their respective positions. The difficulty, of course, is how could the parties come away from the same meeting with very different understandings of what was agreed?
105  I therefore turn to the issue of what was discussed and agreed between the parties on July 29, 2010, with respect to cost.
106  The plaintiff relies on the day timer entry for July 29, 2010, that says "Quoted to Andrew $187,010 - $189,788." He testified that this is what he said at the meeting in the restaurant that day.
107  The day timer is not a complete list of all of Mr. Garside's appointments or all of his work. It is primarily notes that serve as reminders for things such as ordering supplies, telephone calls to make, measurements taken, list of work items at certain jobs and so on. Mr. Garside could not recall the significance of some notes at all and, in other cases, he could not recall details. Other things were not recorded in the day timer. For example, there is no note that the defendants moved into the Birch Road house on or about August 20, 2010. As well, there are no meetings noted in November 2010, and it is accepted that that is when Mr. Garside met with Mr. Stirling to present the cost figure of about $152,000. This figure was rejected by Mr. Stirling, and he asked for the meeting with Ms. Jones. The parties then met on December 4, 2010, and that is when, according to Mr. Garside, the contract ended. The only reference to this in the day timer is a note at 10 AM on December 4, 2010, "Carolyn [sic] Andrew."
108  Overall, while there are omissions, there are no apparent errors of any significance in the day timer, unless the note on July 29, 2010, "Quoted to Andrew $187,010 - $189,788" was an error, as submitted by the defendants.
109  The defendants take issue with the time listed for this entry on July 29, 2010. It is located on the page beside 7:30 or 7:45 AM but it does not appear to be noted at a specific time. The note "Quoted to Andrew $187,010 - $189,788" is followed by a list of work items such as "flooring" and "concrete". At the end of the list is "Bill at Slegg [Lumber]" and 10:00 AM is circled. Mr. Stirling testified that he attended medical appointments the morning of July 29, 2010, and the meeting could not have taken place before late morning or early afternoon. I accept this is a more specific memory of the meeting than that of Mr. Garside. Beyond that I am unable to conclude that any other differences between the parties about the time of the meeting on July 29, 2010, are of great significance.
110  The defendants' challenge to the note in the day timer on July 29, 2010, includes the use of an expert document examiner, and I have the benefit of his report. His opinion was inconclusive as to whether the statement in question was made at a different time than the "surrounding entries." It was written on a stable surface and I conclude that could have been a table, including one in the restaurant where the meeting took place. That, however, is not decisive. It is also apparent that there is no dispute that the note in question was written by Mr. Garside.
111  In summary, I can find nothing in the expert report that contradicts the evidence of Mr. Garside and his record in the day timer that he said "Quoted to Andrew $187,010 - $189,788" at the meeting on July 29, 2010.
112  There are then the circumstances of the day timer being disclosed. As above, as a result of an error by the court reporter at the discovery of Mr. Garside, counsel did not have the day timer until one week before trial. Further, Mr. Garside did not remember the reference to "Quoted to Andrew $187,010 - $189,788" until after he had reviewed the day timer; that is, until after discovery. This is noteworthy because one would expect that a person would recall, without the prompting of the day timer, an important matter such as a quote about cost while in litigation about that issue. Mr. Garside did not remember the entry in the day timer until it was disclosed and his memory on a number of areas in his evidence was similarly not good. On the other hand the evidence is that he wrote the entry.
113  Turning to another matter that may be relevant to the day timer entry on July 29, 2010, of a quote of $187,010 - $189,788, there are other numbers about the cost of the work attributed to Mr. Garside at other times. On April 12, 2011, his previous counsel wrote to counsel for the defendants to say, among other things, "The figure of $91,000 that our client quoted in July, 2010 as the projected cost of completing the interior renovations was based on work that Mr. Stirling and Ms. Jones requested at that point in time." The context of the letter was settlement discussions between counsel.
114  The author of this letter was Kristen Collishaw, an articling student in April 2011; she is now a barrister and solicitor. The plaintiff called her as a witness and she testified that her principal at the time was away on holiday for an extended period so she was handling the plaintiff's file. She talked to the plaintiff before writing the April 12, 2011 letter, and her notes say "Roger did not recall" the amount of $91,000. Ms. Collishaw said in her evidence that her letter had not been careful or drafted well. She said the letter should have said, "If in fact the $91,000 quoted . . ." In cross-examination she said that her notes did not indicate that the plaintiff gave any figure and she could not remember him doing so.
115  A related matter is that the plaintiff's previous counsel also filed a counterclaim on his behalf, dated June 27, 2011. Paragraph 3 of the counterclaim contained the following:
The Plaintiff denies that the parties agreed that the cost of completing the project would not exceed $90,000.00. This figure was an estimate that the Plaintiff provided to the Defendants as the cost of completing the project based on the scope of the work requested by the Defendants at that point in time. This estimate was at all times subject to change as the scope of the work changed.
116  I am urged by the defendants to find that the statements in the April 12, 2011, letter and the counterclaim prove that their estimate of $90,700 was the amount of money agreed to by the plaintiff on July 29, 2010, to complete the work on the Birch Road property. However, the evidence of Ms. Collishaw does not support that proposition and, indeed, it contradicts it. As well, I note that her letter of April 11, 2011, was not copied to Mr. Garside. His uncontradicted evidence is that he knew there were discussions going on between counsel but he did not know the details. Finally, taken on their own, the two statements describe an "estimate" or quotation by the plaintiff, subject to change. It is true that the estimate or quote was in an amount similar to the amount relied on by the defendants but it was not an agreed contract price.
117  I am not persuaded that the reference to $91,000 in the April 11, 2011, letter and the reference to a similar amount in the plaintiff's counterclaim support the conclusion that the plaintiff agreed with the defendants on July 29, 2010, that the cost of completing the work would be that amount.
118  In summary, the matter is not without difficulty, but I conclude that the evidence (including expert evidence) supports a conclusion that it is more likely than not that the entry "Quoted to Andrew $187,010 - $189,788" was made by Mr. Garside and it was made on July 29, 2010. His oral that he said this evidence corroborates the entry in the day timer. That evidence was prompted by the disclosure of the day timer but, again, despite a serious challenge by the defendants to the entry on July 29, 2010, it remains as credible evidence.
119  There is then the number of $90,700 relied on by the defendants as the cost agreed between the parties on July 29, 2010, to complete the work.
120  It may be recalled that this number was the total of costs recorded by Mr. Stirling on the back of the printout provided by Mr. Garside. The costs included specific items such as handrails, floors (wood, carpet, and tile), bath towel holders, lighting and so on. According to the defendants, they came away from the July 29, 2010, meeting with an agreement with Mr. Garside that the itemized work would be completed for $90,700 so that they could move into the Birch Road house. That move was imminent and, in fact, it took place on or about August 20, 2010. In his evidence Mr. Stirling agreed that the defendants asked Mr. Garside what amount of money it would take so that they could move in. However, the intent was to get a number that would complete the work.
121  As a starting point, I accept that the notes written on the back of the cost printout were made by Mr. Stirling. It is also probable that the numbers written beside each item came from Mr. Garside. And there is no disputing that the total is $90,700. Further, in cross-examination Mr. Garside agreed that the defendants "may have asked" whether the work could be completed for $90,700 but he never agreed with that number. What is in dispute is what this number represents.
122  One difficulty with the proposition that $90,700 was the agreed total to complete the work is that the list recorded by Mr. Stirling included two items that the defendants contracted for directly and paid directly to the suppliers. These were the countertop at a cost of $10,000 and the cabinets at a cost of $20,000. Logically, these costs were not the plaintiff's. Therefore, the total of $90,700 that includes these costs cannot represent the plaintiff's cost to complete the work.
123  As well, the defendants' figure of $90,700 left out some costs. There was the work done by the plaintiff between June 24, 2010, (and even before that date) and July 29, 2010, under what I have found above was a cost-plus contract. I also accept the evidence of Mr. Garside that not all of the invoices for completed work had been received by him and that he told the defendants this on July 29, 2010.
124  Some examples of the work not included in the $90,700 amount are evident on the printout presented by Mr. Garside at the July 29, 2010, meeting. There was a cost for stucco of $9,591.55, entered in the plaintiff's tracking system on July 22, 2010. There were also charges for recycling (drywall and garbage) totaling $3,710.66, beginning in January 2010 and the last one recorded was July 17, 2010. The cost for electrical wiring was entered in the tracking system on May 13, 2010, and the cost of an electrical furnace "system" was entered on April 28, 2010. These costs were $11,700 and $5,500, respectively.
125  The defendants respond to this by saying a number of things were done without their knowledge or authorization. For example, the furnace was removed and replaced in a different location, and Mr. Stirling testified that the first time he knew about this was when he asked about an empty cardboard box that had contained the new furnace. However, one of the original conversations the defendants had with the plaintiff was about the furnace. It had originally been in a small room beside the front door, and the defendants wanted it moved to open up the front area of the Birch Road house. Further, the evidence is that the defendants were obviously interested in the work on their new home. They attended from time to time and it is highly unlikely that they would not have noticed that the old furnace room had been removed and replaced as had been discussed from the beginning. I therefore conclude that the defendants knew about the new furnace.
126  Similarly, the defendants knew about the new wiring in new walls or to accommodate the removal of old walls, including media cables. It is not reasonable to suggest, as Mr. Stirling did in his evidence, that existing wiring from an older house could have been used again. Certainly, as described in the evidence of the cable wire installer, Michael Jennings, the defendants' request for satellite television service could not be met using wiring of that vintage.
127  I pause to note that separating out what work was done before or after June 24, 2010, is difficult because there is little evidence describing the sequence of the work and all of the parties had unreliable memories about the different stages of the work. There are the plaintiff's printouts of the cost of materials and labour. These set out the cost of specific subcontractors and specific material suppliers but the order is not necessarily the order that the work was done. I also take this opportunity to note that the printouts do not always represent the actual amount owed by the defendants. That is a separate calculation, and Mr. Garside testified that it would have taken "considerable time" to separate what was owed by the defendants on one of the printouts.
128  Apart from context, the significance of this is that the defendants may have, reasonably, taken the final amounts on the printouts as the amount they owed the plaintiff. In fact the final amount could be less than the total on the printout because there were invoices to come; the final amount could also be more than the total on the printout because some costs from the previous fixed-price contracts were included. For example, at the July 29, 2010, meeting Mr. Garside presented a printout that had total costs in excess of $250,000, but his evidence is that he said at the meeting that $187,010 - $189,788 would complete the project (subject to any invoices not yet recorded).
129  The defendants expressed some concern in their evidence that they had not been aware of the costs accruing on the project. In this regard, the evidence is that Mr. Garside presented the first printout of his costs on July 29, 2010, about one month after the last fixed-price contract was completed on June 24, 2010. His evidence is that he kept the defendants up to date on costs throughout the project, but the evidence is that the first printout of costs was provided on July 29, 2010. I do not agree with the defendants that the plaintiff should have presented information about costs earlier than about one month. On the other hand, the defendants concern that the plaintiff did not provide an actual invoice until October 2011 is well taken. In his evidence Mr. Garside said there was no real explanation for this. In any event, the defendants knew on July 29, 2010, that the printout of that date recorded costs in excess of $250,000.
130  The evidence includes two other documents related to the plaintiff's costs. The next one was at the meeting in November 2010 between Mr. Stirling and Mr. Garside; the latter presented a printout and Mr. Garside said (in discovery) an amount of $152,000 was owed by the defendants. Mr. Stirling rejected that out of hand, and the actual printout is not available. There is also a hand written sheet that Mr. Garside presented at the meeting on December 4, 2010. It recorded an amount of $185,154.57 owed by the defendants to the plaintiff, and it was prepared by the plaintiff's bookkeeper.
131  It is unfortunately the case that the defendants did not review the plaintiff's printouts in any detail or at all. Both defendants testified that, with regards to the printout from July 29, 2010, they did not read it at the meeting on that day or later. Ms. Jones could not recall if Mr. Garside explained at the meeting the costs in the printout; Mr. Stirling testified that Mr. Garside explained some parts of the printout. I find that Mr. Garside did review the printout of costs at the meeting (although it is unlikely he reviewed the entire 13 page document). At one point Mr. Stirling testified that Mr. Garside did not make any sense when he was explaining the printout, but Mr. Stirling also could not remember what he said. It was certainly open to the defendants to review the printout at the meeting or afterwards. As above this was not necessarily an accurate statement of what was owed, but it was a detailed statement of what work was done, what materials were used, when the invoices were received by the plaintiff and who did the work or supplied the materials.
132  The defendants did not review the printout given to them on July 29, 2010, and the reasons for this are not explained. However, there can be no real dispute that information to explain the costs that had been accruing up to July 29, 2010, was available to the defendants on that date. More significantly, those costs were more than $90,700 to complete the project if they were combined with the list prepared by Mr. Stirling at the meeting on July 29, 2010. Unfortunately, the defendants missed an opportunity to understand the actual costs for the work on their house.
133  A further concern of the defendants is that they say that their budget was exceeded on July 29, 2010, and the plaintiff knew it was exceeded. To the extent that this is a comment on the plaintiff's November 2009 estimate of $200,000 - $250,000 this is correct. However, the defendants knew this in June 2010 after the completion of the last fixed-price contract. They knew more work was required and they either authorized it or acquiesced in it proceeding.
134  Part of the defendants' submission on their budget involves their early interest in purchasing a boat owned by the Mr. Garside at a cost of about $100,000. The significance of this is that the defendants' budget was $750,000 - $850,000 to purchase the Birch Road property and do the renovations. The purchase price for the property was $575,000 and the balance was available for the renovations. On this basis the original estimate by Mr. Garside in November 2010 of $200,000 - $250,000 made sense for the defendants and left open the option to buy the boat. There is logic to these calculations.
135  However, the evidence is that Mr. Garside was not told by the defendants that he had a budget to work with until July 29, 2010. However, the evidence is not clear that Mr. Stirling's notes on that date about the defendants' budget were explained or disclosed to Mr. Garside. In addition, there was the cost of the work from June 24, 2010, to July 29, 2010, that was ongoing and substantial. With regards to the boat, there is no evidence that the defendants said to the plaintiff that they could not buy the boat because the cost of the project had surpassed a budget amount. I cannot interpret that decision to mean that the plaintiff had detailed knowledge of the defendants' budget and violated that budget. For these reasons I find that, until July 29, 2010, there was an open-ended budget, as would be consistent with the cost-plus contract for that period.
136  In summary, up to July 29, 2010, the contractual arrangement between the parties was a cost-plus one and the defendants knew or ought to have known this. It appears that the defendants prepared a list of costs on July 29, 2010, that reflected what they wanted done to complete the project. However, the list was not based on the plaintiff's printout of costs; it included costs that were not the plaintiff's and it did not include work that had actually been done and not yet been billed. I accept that Mr. Garside provided the numbers used by the defendants for their list but I am unable to find that he agreed that the project could be completed for the total of that list of $90,700. In short, it is probable that the defendants prepared and acted on an inaccurate and incomplete list of costs.
137  This is another matter that is not without difficulty, but I find it is probable that Mr. Garside provided a range of $187,010 - $189,788 as a quote to Mr. Stirling on July 29, 2010, to complete the work. The defendants did not need to agree to that quote but I find it was available for them to consider, as was the detailed but not necessarily complete printout of costs to date. It follows that there was no agreement that the project would be completed for $90,700.
138  I return to the issue of the nature of the contract between the parties. As discussed above, the parties were certainly not clear about their contractual relations and no specific legal definition is a perfect fit. I have found above that the contract between the parties from June 2010 to July 29, 2010, was a cost-plus one. To the extent there is a need to define the contract after July 29, 2010, I conclude that it continued as a cost-plus arrangement but with the proviso that the cost would be $187,010 - $189,788. To be clear that amount was a quote rather than an agreed contract price. It represented the plaintiff's commitment to complete the items listed by Mr. Stirling, but it also included other costs. And the nature of a quote is that it may change.
139  There are other matters that relate to the discussions between the parties. First, there is the plaintiff's allegation that the defendants told him on December 4, 2010, that he should accept their offer of $110,000 or the next week it would be $90,000 and the following week it would be $80,000. There is also the defendants' statement that the plaintiff proposed a cost-plus contract on July 29, 2010, because he had just lost $3,000 on a fixed-price contract on another project. I find that neither of these incidents has been proved on the required standard of proof.
Management fee
140  As a final cost matter, there is an issue of whether a 12% management fee was agreed on. The defendants say it was left open-ended, to be determined by them at the end; the plaintiff says it was always agreed that the management fee would be 12%.
141  As background Mr. Garside testified that his fee for cost-plus contracts ranges from 10 to 15%, depending on the size of the contract. At times 100% of his work is done on this basis. As well, there is the previous cost-plus contract between the parties in March 2010 for work on the West Saanich Road property of the defendants. The invoice for that contract included a management fee of 15% and it was immediately paid. The defendants say that there was no discussion of a management fee for the contract after June 24, 2010; it simply appeared on the final invoice.
142  From the previous cost-plus contract I conclude that the defendants were familiar with the concept of a management fee in the context of a cost-plus contract. As well, Mr. Garside testified that he proposed waiving his management fee at the later meeting on December 4, 2010, as a way to resolve the issue of costs. However, that offer (which included a cost in excess of $165,000) was rejected by the defendants. Finally, there is nothing in Mr. Garside's day timer about any management fee. However, that is not determinative because some things of significance are not recorded there.
143  As in many issues in this litigation, it is one person's word against another.
144  I find that it is implausible that the plaintiff would forgo a management fee on a substantial project such as this. He has managed many cost-plus contracts in the past with success. He was clear in his evidence that he said a management fee would be applied. As well, the plaintiff charged and was paid a management fee on the first cost-plus contract in March 2010 for a contract amount substantially smaller than the amount at stake here. Assuming the defendants are correct that this fee was not discussed and simply turned up on the bill, it must have still been the expectation that another fee would be charged for a second cost-plus contract. It is similarly difficult on its face to accept that the plaintiff would simply leave it to the defendants to decide if there would be any management fee at all or, if so, the percentage.
145  It may have been that Mr. Garside said something to the effect that a management fee could be discussed later, but that is speculation and I am unable to find that he said or agreed that it could be waived. He did testify that he offered to forgo a fee on December 4, 2010, and this evidence is supported by the handwritten document of that date prepared by his bookkeeper. But this was rejected by the defendants because it was part of a proposal that they pay in excess of $185,000.
146  In light of these factors and the previous history of the parties with regards to a cost-plus contract and a management fee, I find that one was agreed on here. I find that a management fee of 12% is applicable.
Deficiencies
147  The defendants allege that the plaintiff's work was deficient with regards to quality of work and because some work was not completed at all. They go as far as to say that the cost of the deficiencies of the plaintiff's work cancel out any money they owe. I presume this submission includes unspecified damages they seek in negligence because the cost of all deficiencies claimed by the defendants does not offset the plaintiff's entire claim, even assuming the starting point for calculating that claim is $90,700.
148  It is generally accepted that there are always problems to fix after a project of this scale is completed, perhaps after any project. The plaintiff testified that he has always stood behind his work and his many years of running a successful construction business building and renovating custom homes generally supports that statement. His practice is to, for example, be available to customers for a period of time, sometimes up to ten years after the end of the project, to make good on any repairs. One of his subcontractors testified about this practice as well as Mr. Garside's firm expectation that a subcontractor address any problem within a day of being requested to do so.
149  Mr. Garside also testified that he generally takes responsibility for the damage done by subcontractors he has hired. An example of this was that he paid for refinishing the hardwood floor when it had been damaged by subcontractors. He went further and replaced boards that had been gouged by the defendants' use of unprotected chair legs. He was intending to repair a part of the exterior stucco that had been damaged by a subcontractor but the defendants asked him to leave their property before he could do so. He testified about other repairs he made at his cost.
150  In general Mr. Garside relies on more than 40 years' work doing custom homes and renovations, usually on a cost-plus basis, and he points out that he has never previously had to come to court to resolve a problem with a client.
151  There is written evidence of at least three trips by Mr. Garside to the Birch Road property to deal with deficiencies. His day timer for August 20, 2010, lists seven tasks such as grout around the fireplace and laundry, filler at the kitchen window and wood trim on the front door. Similarly, on August 30, 2010, there is a list of 22 items including new front door, skylights, towel bar, checking the fridge water, stair nosing and mirrors. And on November 10, 2010, a list of 13 items is recorded including window screens, countertop, dust at the top of the stairwell, repaint door sliders at pantry, replace a four way switch in the hallway and "sunscreen costs." I pause to note that a complaint such as dust in the stairway is very much in the de minimis category of deficiencies.
152  With respect to the list on November 20, 2010, Mr. Stirling testified that he gave Mr. Garside a list of deficiencies about that time. He believed Mr. Garside wrote them down and he may have written them in his day timer. Later in his evidence he was asked if the November 20, 2010, date recorded by Mr. Garside for a meeting to discuss deficiencies was accurate. Mr. Stirling replied that he was not sure the time recorded by Mr. Garside was correct but he did not dispute the date. I find that the day timer entry on November 20, 2010 is accurate.
153  From this evidence I conclude that there were discussions about deficiencies between the parties and deficiencies were addressed by the plaintiff up to at least November 20, 2010.
154  A further contextual matter relates to the meeting between the parties on December 4, 2010. This was not a pleasant event for anyone. The plaintiff presented a written note that said the defendants owed him in excess of $185,000, and the defendants were surprised and unhappy about this. Ms. Jones was offended by Mr. Garside's suggestion that the defendants pay what they could and then pay the balance in instalments although it is not clear she said that at the time. She testified that she thought she did not want to pay anything and I find that she said that to Mr. Garside. She abruptly left the meeting and went upstairs.
155  Mr. Stirling agreed that Ms. Jones asked Mr. Garside to leave the house and he showed him to the door. Mr. Stirling testified that the meeting was not "heated." I accept that no one was yelling but I also find it was very tense. He also testified that Mr. Garside said he thought the defendants would be good for the figure he presented and Mr. Garside also thought something could be negotiated. In his evidence Mr. Garside confirmed that the defendants refused to pay the invoice and that he was asked to leave.
156  Following the meeting of December 4, 2010, the parties had very little to do with each other. Mr. Garside testified that he attended at the Birch Road property to do some small jobs with the hope that the defendants would come around to pay their bill. Mr. Stirling testified that things remained amicable after the meeting, including Mr. Garside sending a small crew on or about December 17, 2010 to help install a new fridge that had been replaced on warranty after being requested to do so. The plaintiff was paid for this work by the supplier of the fridge.
157  In my view a fair reading of the December 4, 2010, meeting is that it was the end of any contractual relationship between the parties. Mr. Garside presented the plaintiff's account, the defendants refused to pay it, or any amount, and they asked Mr. Garside to leave. At that point all parties were left with the unpleasant options of changing their positions substantially or pursuing legal action. There was an attempt in February 2011 by Mr. Stirling to resolve the impasse for an amount of $110,000, but Mr. Garside declined to accept what he described in his evidence as about one half of what was owed.
158  The plaintiff urges me to find that he had no further contractual obligations with respect to work on the Birch Road property after December 4, 2010. Specifically, it is submitted that the defendants ended the contractual relationship with the plaintiff and he had no obligation to redress any deficiencies. I accept that the contract between the parties ended on December 4, 2010, and this was primarily as a result of the defendants refusing to pay anything to the plaintiff. I can see no other conclusion to be drawn from that situation other than that he defendants ended the contract.
159  However, I do not agree with the plaintiff that this finding ends any obligation he has to address legitimate deficiencies in his work. I therefore turn to consideration of the issue of specific deficiencies. As above, the context for these deficiencies is the cost-plus contracts from June 2010 to July 29, 2010, and then the one in dispute I have found above to be a cost-price contract with the quotation of a cost of $187,010 - $189,788.
160  The defendants have provided three letters from other contractors with respect to deficiencies and oral evidence from one of those contractors. In addition, Mr. Stirling testified about deficiencies and provided some photographs.
161  There is a letter dated September 20, 2012, from a supplier of furnaces and fireplaces to Mr. Stirling. It quotes a price of $2,150.40 (including HST) to supply and install sealing for a gas fireplace and a wood burning fireplace including fire stops. These fireplaces had been installed by subcontractors hired by the plaintiff. Among other things, the letter of September 20, 2012, describes the installation of an aftermarket fan in one of the fireplaces. According to the defendants this work and cost are a result of deficiencies in the work of the plaintiff.
162  The evidence is that the defendants picked out the fireplaces that were originally installed, but after installation they were not happy with the amount of heat from at least one of them. The fan installation referred to in the September 20, 2012, letter apparently addresses that concern. Colin Loganhume, the plaintiff's installer, testified that there was nothing in the September 20, 2012, letter that was part of his work or part of his discussions with the defendants. Further there were no complaints from the defendants until they asked Mr. Loganhume about in-line fans after the installation was done. With regards to fire stops, Mr. Stirling presented photographs of the fireplace chimneys, and there are no fire stops. However, the chimneys are contained in wooden towers framed on the outside of exterior walls. They were inspected and there is no requirement for fire stops in this situation; fire stops would be required if the chimneys were inside actual walls.
163  A further consideration is that the allegation that the plaintiff's subcontractor did not install fire stops for the fireplace chimneys was not put to that subcontractor when he gave evidence. I am entitled to consider this as a factor in assessing the credibility of the defendants' evidence (Gill Tech Framing Ltd. v. Gill,  at para. 29; citing Fast Trac Bobcat & Excavating Service v. Riverfront Corporate Centre Ltd,  at para. 9; and relying on the so-called rule in Browne v. Dunn (1893), 6 R. 67 (H.L)).
164  I conclude that the work described in the letter of September 20, 2012, did not result from deficient work by the plaintiff or his subcontractors. The defendants decided the addition of fans was necessary because the fireplaces they chose were not doing what they thought they should do. Fire stops were not required in this application.
165  A second letter provided by the defendants with regards to their allegation of deficiencies is dated May 7, 2012. It is from Dave Meade who operates KLAD Custom Building. Mr. Meade has been operating his own company doing custom home renovations for two years, and prior to that he was the general manager of a company that did similar work. He testified on behalf of the defendants.
166  The letter of May 7, 2012, refers to a quote for a, drywall, painting, exterior finishing and clean up. The total cost is $8,979.04 (including HST) and individual items are not costed. Mr. Meade testified that the work described in the letter was completed about this time and the defendants paid him this amount.
167  The letter of May 7, 2012 also included construction of a "pergola." However, as above, the notes taken by the defendants on July 29, 2010 refer to a "pagoda." I have not done an exhaustive review of the evidence but a review of my notes indicates that the parties referred to pagoda in their evidence. Counsel, after the trial and in response to a question from me, advised that pagoda and pergola were one and the same. Mr. Meade was not asked about this in his evidence because the use of pergola rather than pagoda did not come up then. It is not totally satisfactory but I presume that he meant pagoda when he said pergola. I will use the former word, pagoda.
168  With regards to the pagoda it was something talked about early on between the parties, the plaintiff gave an estimate for its construction and it was still being discussed in May 2010. There is reference to a pagoda on the handwritten list Mr. Stirling prepared at the meeting on July 29, 2010, with a cost of $3,000. Mr. Garside agreed in his evidence that the pagoda was something that was part of the original plan. It was not however built by the plaintiff, although anchor bolts for the structure were installed when concrete was poured. Mr. Garside testified that the defendants cancelled the pagoda; his "guess" was that they could not afford it. However, when he was asked in cross-examination whether he said to the defendants that he should get going on building the pagoda, he replied that he may have said that.
169  The cost of the pagoda is listed in the defendants' notes of July 29, 2010 as $3,000. However, since the context for the construction of the pagoda is a cost-plus contract, it is not open to the defendants to have it built at the cost of the plaintiff. That would mean they would get a pagoda at no cost. Therefore, the pagoda is not a deficiency and the cost must be deducted from the costs in the letter of May 7, 2012.
170  With regards to drywall and painting in the May 7, 2012, letter, much of this work was required because the defendants changed the skylights. But the work remained incomplete, and there was an obligation to complete the work as part of the quote given on July 29, 2010. It is a deficiency. Mr. Meade, the defendants' current contractor, testified that the ensuite bathroom paint was peeling and needed primer and new paint. I also accept that as a deficiency. The defendants would like painting under the stairs but that is a design choice; I deduct $200 for that item.
171  With regards to the reference to exterior caulking around patio doors in the letter of May 7, 2012, this strikes me as something that the plaintiff would have done as part of his regular and established practice of looking after the work he did. I conclude it was a deficiency in the work. Clean-up costs are not separated but they are, in general, reasonable.
172  The next record of deficiencies presented by the defendants is another letter From Mr. Meade, dated February 21, 2013. The specific work proposed in this quotation has not been done and it is (with costs before taxes in brackets): windows ($705), painting ($6,600), heated floor in bathroom ($5,000), exterior cantilever in master bedroom ($2,100), front door ($350), sealed unit above staircase ($1,520), exterior sliding doors ($3,840), skylight flashing ($720), flooring and vinyl decks ($2,820).
173  As a general comment on this list I note that it was made in February 2013, some two years after the plaintiff last worked on the defendants' Birch Road property. Undoubtedly, after this time routine maintenance and repairs are now required.
174  With regards to the specific items in Mr. Meade's letter of February 21, 2013:
Windows ($705)
175  Mr. Garside testified that he had done caulking around the windows in November or December 2010. Apparently this was not finished and I fix $500 for that task.
Painting ($6,600)
176  As Mr. Meade and Mr. Garside testified, nail pops are a common occurrence after construction is completed and the building settles. They are, therefore, a deficiency although not always one a builder has any control over. They are not in the lists recorded by Mr. Garside in his day timer in August and November 2010 but they may not have been apparent at that time. Some painting will be required after the nail pops are repaired. I see no basis for painting the entire interior of the house at the cost of the plaintiff two years after its work was completed. Painting for baseboards is dealt with in the discussion on floors. I fix the cost for repairing the nail pops, including paint, at $1,200.
Heated floor in en suite bathroom ($5,000)
177  The plaintiff installed in floor heating in the en suite bathroom with the standard spaces of 5" between the heat tubes. This leaves some areas between the tubes unheated, and Mr. Garside explained this to the defendants. There were no complaints from them after they moved into the Birch Road house, and this item is not on the August and November lists of deficiencies in the day timer of Mr. Garside.
178  Mr. Meade explained in his evidence that the defendants now want to replace the existing heated floor to install tubing 2-3" apart because there are unheated parts. This is a change of design and/or specifications. It is not a deficiency in the plaintiff's work.
Exterior cantilever in Master Bedroom ($2,100)
179  Mr. Meade testified that the master bedroom closet is cool and its floor is cantilevered over an outside area. He testified that his quotation is to remove the stucco "to try and discover where the draft is coming from." He did not know if there was insulation under the closet. The closet is not heated, Mr. Meade agreed that a closet should not be heated and he agreed that the insulation of the house was inspected.
180  I conclude that coolness in a closet that cannot be heated is not a deficiency. Further, the expense of $2,100 is not warranted to investigate a situation where insulation is the only remedy and it is at least probable that the floor is insulated.
Front door ($350)
181  There is some history to the front door, primarily of the defendants complaining about its finish. The plaintiff replaced it once to placate them. Mr. Meade testified that the finish remains "not to the satisfaction" of the defendants. He could not recall the exact condition of it. This is not a deficiency.
Sealed unit above staircase ($1,520)
182  The defendants seek the removal and installation of sealed units to access "compromised interior framing members" and to replace framing members as required. The framing was inspected, along with windows and insulation, and I conclude that any problem with the framing now, two years after the plaintiff left the job, is not a deficiency it is responsible for.
Exterior sliding doors ($3,840)
183  The defendants seek the replacement of 8 sliding doors and repair of the stucco around them based on the letter of February 21, 2013 from Mr. Meade. He testified that they do not open or close properly. Mr. Stirling testified about this as well. Mr. Garside testified that he has never had to replace a sliding door he has installed.
184  In his evidence Mr. Meade was not sure whether there were 8 or 4 sliding doors. He also acknowledged that he did not know what the problem was and that there could be a number of things wrong including not being installed correctly. The estimated cost for what are, frankly, vague complaints is high. I cannot agree that, if there is a deficiency, that the amount claimed is justified.
Sky light flashing ($720)
185  According to the letter of February 21, 2013, the sky lights need to be removed in order to "replace compromised framing members as required." Flashing is also to be supplied and installed. As above the framing was inspected more than two years previously.
186  Mr. Meade agreed the lack of flashing was a result of the defendants changing their mind about what kind of skylights, from closed to ones that open. This is an extra rather than a deficiency and not something the plaintiff should pay for.
Flooring ($25,880)
187  When the defendants purchased the Birch Road property it had hardwood floors that were water damaged. One of the first conversations between the parties was what to do with the flooring in the house and the original idea was to refinish the floors and replace any boards that required replacing. However at some point, Mr. Garside advised the defendants that the cost of a new floor was not much different than the cost of refinishing and repairing the old floor. As Mr. Stirling put it in his evidence, the decision to go with a new floor was an easy one to make.
188  The old floor was removed, stored and ultimately sold by the plaintiff for $1,000. This was given to the defendants, who in turn gave Mr. Garside's son and his wife $500 for helping with the sale.
189  When it came time to install the new floor the installer, Andrew Hill, tested the moisture level of the subfloor, as is normally done. The first level was higher than the accepted level and a decision was made to install dehumidifiers and put off the installation of the floors. A second moisture test had better results but the level was still not at the acceptable level. The problem with having high moisture levels in the subfloor is that there is a very good chance of the flooring that is installed over the subfloor will expand and then there will be cupping of each board. Everyone understood the problem and the risk.
190  At this point the versions of what happened differ substantially. Mr. Stirling testified that Mr. Hill said Mr. Garside told him to go ahead with the installation of the new floor and Mr. Garside would take the risk. On the other hand, Mr. Garside and Mr. Hill testified that Mr. Stirling said that he did not want to wait any longer and that the wood flooring should be installed even with the high levels of moisture in the subfloor. The floor was installed with the high moisture levels in the subfloor.
191  Mr. Hill testified that he was contacted by Mr. Stirling about a year after the floors were installed and he was told that they had started cupping. Mr. Stirling said he was not "mad or coming at me for it" (as Mr. Hill stated in his evidence), he was just looking for advice about what to do. Mr. Hill suggested further use of dehumidifiers, and he did not hear anything else until this litigation. In cross-examination Mr. Stirling confirmed this conversation with Mr. Hill.
192  There does not seem to be much doubt that the new flooring was installed over subflooring that had an unacceptable level of moisture. As everyone knew, the risk was that the floors would start cupping and that, in fact, happened. The question is who authorized the installation?
193  While this is primarily a conflict in evidence as between Mr. Garside and Mr. Stirling, there is also the evidence of Mr. Hill. He confirms that it was Mr. Stirling that authorized the installation of the new floors. It is true that Mr. Hill has a past and current working relationship with Mr. Garside. However there is also the telephone call from Mr. Stirling to Mr. Hill after the floors were installed and after the cupping was discovered. During that conversation Mr. Stirling did not suggest to Mr. Hill that there was a problem with who authorized the installation. It is possible that Mr. Stirling was looking for some free advice without engaging Mr. Hill in how the problem arose. Another explanation is that Mr. Stirling accepted that it was his problem.
194  Finally, the defendants' assertion that Mr. Hill told Mr. Stirling that Mr. Garside authorized the installation and took the risk was not put to Mr. Hill in cross-examination. I am entitled to consider this as a factor in assessing the credibility of the defendants' evidence (Gill Tech Framing Ltd. v. Gill,  at para. 29; citing Fast Trac Bobcat & Excavating Service v. Riverfront Corporate Centre Ltd,  at para. 9; and relying on the so-called rule in Browne v. Dunn (1893), 6 R. 67 (H.L)).
195  I find that it is probable that it was Mr. Stirling who authorized the installation of the wood floors over a subfloor that had higher than acceptable moisture levels. This is not a deficiency in the plaintiff's work, or the work of his subcontractor.
Vinyl Decks ($2,820)
196  The defendants seek the cost of removing and replacing the existing vinyl decking (and railings) from two decks at the Birch Road house. Mr. Meade testified that the decks do not drain and puddles gather in the wet weather. Further, puddles in the low spots remain for some time; they dry out after a period of time. There is no allegation the vinyl is leaking. Mr. Garside testified that it was installed with the seams overlapped as required by the manufacturer.
197  Mr. Garside testified that he frequently gets comments from customers such as the defendants in this case after vinyl decks are installed because of puddling. Drains are installed and some slope is put into the deck to prevent this. The slope can be increased but, if the slope is significant, then customers complain about that.
198  I accept the evidence of Mr. Garside that it is not possible to have a deck with a reasonable slope that is entirely free of puddling. Further, I interpret the defendants concern with the vinyl decks to be unrealistic given the construction of decks and the climate in which they live. And this matter was not raised by Mr. Stirling when deficiencies were discussed with Mr. Garside in August or November 2010. Perhaps it was dry in August but that cannot be said about November. I conclude that whatever problems the defendants perceive with the vinyl decks are not deficiencies.
Other issues
199  In his evidence Mr. Stirling reviewed a number of other matters he considered to be deficiencies in the work at the Birch Road house. For example, there was an issue of the placing of the stovetop and the placing of an island as part of the kitchen cabinets. There was considerable discussion about these matters and the cabinetmaker testified that he abandoned a bill of $4,000 rather than deal with the defendants any further. The kitchen cabinets were ordered and paid for directly by the defendants, rather than through the plaintiff, but the cabinetmaker's experience dealing with the defendants is consistent with the plaintiff's.
200  Another problem Mr. Stirling described was trying to move a high voltage wire in a wall that the plaintiff built. Apparently he attempted to do this himself and then sought the assistance of an electrician friend from work. They could not find the source of the wire. Drywall had to be cut and a new wire installed. The electrician did not testify. If there is a problem with this wire it has not been adequately explained. It is not a deficiency.
201  Mr. Stirling did raise an issue about the molding around some doors and some windows. He produced photographs to demonstrate that in some corners the molding was short, thus leaving a gap where weather could get to the window. I accept that these are deficiencies in the work managed by the plaintiff and I assess an amount of $500 to correct those deficiencies.
The plaintiff's claim
202  It follows from the above that the plaintiff is entitled to a claim for the cost of his materials and subcontractors, plus a management fee and taxes on that fee for the work at the Birch Road property. This follows from the cost-plus contract that was in place from June 24, 2010, to about December 4, 2010. Further, some of the costs of the plaintiff from before June 24, 2010, are legitimate to claim.
203  The plaintiff's claim at trial is in the amount of $206,627.32. This is the total of 108 invoices for materials and labour, from February 26, 2010, to December 30, 2010. There is no serious dispute that all of these costs were for the work on the Birch Road property. As Ms. Jones put it in her evidence, she did not think that Mr. Garside would bill anything that was not appropriate. The total claim includes a management fee of 12% which I have found applicable ($24,795.28) and taxes on that fee ($2,975.43). The overall total is $234,398.03.
204  The plaintiff's claim of $206,627.32 is more than the quote of $187,010 -$189,788 that Mr. Garside gave on July 29, 2010. The difference is about $19,000 or about 10%. A previous decision has concluded that leeway of 15% between an estimate and final payment price is acceptable (Mt. Cheam Developments Ltd. v. Clark et al, , 1988 CarswellBC 715 at paras. 11-12 (S.C.)).
205  None of these costs have been paid. As above, the defendants submit they owe nothing to the plaintiff. This is based on the defendants' view of the contract price of $90,700 minus the amount of deficiencies and work that should have been done. I have found against the defendants on that issue.
206  I have found the following deficiencies that are the responsibility of the plaintiff:
 Letter of May 7, 2012: $5,797.04 
 (drywall, painting,  
 exterior finish, clean  
 up; less pagoda and  
 paint under stairs)  
 Caulking around windows: $500.00 
 Repair of nail pops: $1,200.00 
 Repair of molding on windows: $500.00 
 Subtotal: $8,170.04 
 HST: $981.48 
 Total: $9,160.52 
207  I conclude that the evidence supports a net claim by the plaintiff in the amount of $225,237.48 ($234,398.03 less $9,160.52).
Negligence
208  In their counterclaim the defendants plead negligence on the part of the plaintiff. It is alleged that the plaintiff failed to properly manage the work at the defendants' Birch Road property and this failure resulted in damage and loss. It is also alleged that the work of the plaintiff was not completed in a professional and workmanlike manner.
209  There is not much doubt that the plaintiff owed the defendants a duty of care. The question is whether this duty was breached.
210  A significant part of the defendants' allegation of negligence relates to their assertion that the plaintiff did not keep proper accounts and did not submit a proper invoice until October 2011. The defendants rely on a 1947 decision from Ontario that a contractor in a cost-plus contract has an obligation to keep proper accounts (G.T. Parameter Construction Ltd. v. Sanders,  (H.C.J.); also Taylor v. Taylor, [1954] O.W.N. 575 (H.C.J.)). I am not persuaded that, as said in G.T. Parameter Construction Ltd. (para. 10), that a contractor under a cost-plus contract is in a favourable position because he has "no risk of any loss." The subject case is an example of just such a risk.
211  In any event, I accept that the plaintiff's records as they were presented to the defendants were not to a high standard. I say this by comparing the contract in dispute with the previous fixed-price contracts and the previous cost-plus contract which were characterized by very complete quotations and invoices. However, as discussed above, it cannot be said that the defendants were left in the dark for an extended period about the cost of the work that is now disputed. They knew from simple observation that the work was ongoing from the end of the last fixed-price contract in June 2010 and they knew, or should have known, that there would be costs for that work. They also knew at that time that Mr. Garside's estimate of $200,000 - $250,000 had been met and more was required to pay for the work.
212  More significantly, they knew on July 29, 2010, when Mr. Garside gave them a printout of the costs to date that they were in the order of $240,000. This was not what they owed because the print-out did not, for example, include invoices for work not yet received by the plaintiff. That number was not what they wanted to hear and, indeed, the evidence is that they did not read the print-out then or after the July 29, 2010, meeting. In the end the plaintiff submitted an invoice in October 2011 in an amount significantly higher than its previous numbers but that was the result of the discussions between the parties breaking down rather than poor record keeping.
213  There is no legal requirement for a contractor to provide record keeping to a high standard. I conclude that the plaintiff's records in this case were adequate (assuming that poor record keeping by a builder under a cost-plus contract amounts to negligence).
214  It is also alleged by the defendants that the plaintiff was negligent by failing to advise them of the impact of changes to designs of the work. To a large extent I conclude that the changes made in the work were at the direction of the defendants. They had in mind one project within one budget amount and, from a cost point of view, it was essentially complete by the end of the last fixed-price contract in June 2010 when the original estimate of $200,000 - $250,000 was met. The work carried on with their knowledge and they were never clear about what the budget was to be; on July 29, 2010, there was some clarity, but I have found above there was not the clarity the defendants wanted. By July 29, 2010, on the basis of their own incomplete numbers, the project had expanded substantially. I have addressed above the issue of the furnace which was moved and replaced as discussed with the defendants. Further, the defendants had unrealistic expectations that, for example, somehow the wiring of an older house could be reused in the newly renovated house.
215  The defendants also allege that the plaintiff did not obtain the best prices for the trades work for the project. The evidence for this allegation is thin and it is not particularized in argument. One aspect of it, perhaps, is that Mr. Garside's son was one of the labour contractors for the Birch Road property. Mr. Garside was questioned in cross-examination about whether this was good value and whether, in fact, his son was running the project rather than Mr. Garside. He denied this was the case, and there are only the defendant's suspicions that are contrary to this denial. In fact, the defendants rewarded Mr. Garside's son by paying he and his wife half of the money received from selling the old wood flooring.
216  As for damage to the project by other trades the evidence is that this was no more than would be expected and, in any case, the plaintiff took responsibility for it. Any issue with regards to deficiencies is addressed above. It is true that the plaintiff did not construct the pagoda but I have found above that was a deficiency rather than an issue of negligence. Finally, the complaints by Mr. Stirling in his evidence that Mr. Garside was sometimes not available because he was on holidays or working at other jobs does not by any means amount to negligence on his part.
217  I summary, I deny the defendant's counterclaim that the plaintiff was negligent when it managed the work on the Birch Road project.
Builders Lien
218  The defendants raise a timeliness issue with respect to the plaintiff's claim under the BLA. In summary, the defendants submit that the final day for filing a lien in this case was January 9, 2011, but the lien was filed on January 12, 2011. The plaintiff disagrees that his lien was filed late. As general context, the time limits for filing a lien under the BLA start when the project is substantially complete and they are strict. I note that Mr. Garside said in his evidence that the project was substantially complete on November 10, 2010, but he qualified that statement to say that on that date some things that were "not minor" were uncompleted.
219  I reproduce the applicable parts of the BLA as follows:
Definitions and interpretation
1 (1) In this Act:
. . .
For the purposes of this Act, a head contract, contract or subcontract is substantially performed if the work to be done under that contract is capable of completion or correction at a cost of not more than
3% of the first $500 000 of the contract price,
2% of the next $500 000 of the contract price, and
1% of the balance of the contract price.
For the purposes of this Act, an improvement is completed if the improvement or a substantial part of it is ready for use or is being used for the purpose intended.
. . .
Time for filing claim of lien
20 (1) If a certificate of completion has been issued with respect to a contract or subcontract, the claims of lien of
(a) the contractor or subcontractor, and
any persons engaged by or under the contractor or subcontractor
may be filed no later than 45 days after the date on which the certificate of completion was issued.
A claim of lien that is not governed by subsection (1) may be filed no later than 45 days after
the head contract has been completed, abandoned or terminated, if the owner engaged a head contractor, or
the improvement has been completed or abandoned, if paragraph (a) does not apply.
Subsection (1) does not operate to extend or renew the time for filing of a claim of lien if
that time would otherwise be determined with reference to the time an earlier certificate of completion was issued, or
time had started to run under subsection (2).
On the filing of a claim of lien under this Act, the registrar or gold commissioner has no duty to inquire as to whether or not the lien claimant has complied with the time limit for filing the claim of lien.
220  According to the defendants, $480,736.55 is the total contract price. This figure is taken from the plaintiff's invoice of October 12, 2011, with the addition of the five previous fixed-price contracts. Applying section 1(2) of the BLA, the defendants point out that the contract was substantially performed when 3% of the total contract price was capable of completion. This 3% amount is $14,422.09, using the defendants' estimate of the contract price.
221  According to the defendants, the billing of invoices from suppliers and subcontractors to the plaintiff is indicative of completion and more than 97% of the contract price was billed on or before November 23, 2010. That is, on or about November 23, 2010, there was substantial completion of the contract and the 45 day period for filing a lien commenced on that day. It expired on January 9, 2011, and, therefore, filing the lien on January 12, 2011, was late.
222  In my view, there are two errors in the defendant's calculation. The first relates to their setting the contract price at $480,736.55. That figure represents all of the previous fixed-price contracts as well as the plaintiff's invoice of October 12, 2011, in the amount of $238,627.55. It is relevant but not decisive that the plaintiff's claim in this litigation is for a lower amount, $234,398.03. Of more significance in my view is that the previous five fixed-price contracts are not appropriately included in the price of the contract at issue. The fixed-price contracts were complete to everyone's satisfaction and paid and the plaintiff does not seek a lien under those contracts and nor is one available.
223  I find that the appropriate contract price for the calculation of the time limit for filing the lien in this case is $234,398.03. The 3% amount is $7,031.94.
224  I also disagree with the defendant's use of the list of invoices submitted by the plaintiff as the best indication of the substantial completion. In my view, there is an alternate approach that more accurately reflects the completion of the improvement. The letter submitted by the defendants from KLAD Custom Building, dated May 7, 2012, lists deficiencies that were completed at or about that time. I have found above that, with some exceptions, the letter reflects legitimate deficiencies and the amount is $5,979.04. There are other amounts as described in the letter of February 13, 2013, from Mr. Meade that reflect work not yet done, totalling $9,160.52 for all deficiencies.
225  The result is that, as of February 13, 2013, more than 3% of the contract price was unpaid and under the BLA, the improvement was not substantially complete.
226  It follows that the filing of the lien on January 12, 2011 was not late.
Interest
227  The plaintiff seeks pre and post judgment interest pursuant to sections 1 and 8 of the Court Order Interest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 79, at a rate of 6%. This is opposed by the defendants.
228  The plaintiff points out that the defendants have paid no money for the work done on their property since the last fixed-price contract in June 2010. Since that time, as is evident above, there have been costs in excess of $200,000 for the work. There is no evidence of any agreement between the parties as to the interest to be charged on overdue accounts and that is consistent with the informal nature of their contractual relations since June 2010.
229  Mr. Garside testified that he had to delay payments to his subcontractors using funds from other work. This was necessary in order to maintain the plaintiff's relationship with reliable subcontractors. Mr. Garside also testified that his working capital was reduced and he was forced to seek financing to keep his business going. His evidence is that the interest he paid for this financing was 6%. It is not clear that he had to finance the entire amount owing by the defendants.
230  As of July 1, 2013, the Registrar's rate under the Court Order Interest Act for pre-judgment interest is 1% and the post-judgment rate is 3%.
231  The plaintiff relies on two previous authorities for its submission that a higher rate than the Registrar's rates is appropriate in this case. In one judgment (Hardwoods Specialty Products LP v. Rite Style Manufacturing Ltd., ) the Court of Appeal said that the Registrar's rates of interest are only "rates of convenience to trial judges" and those rates should not be seen as the default rate (para. 17). In that case the court awarded interest at 5% per annum (having set aside the trial judge's decision to set interest at 24%). In the other case (Domtar Inc. v. Univar Canada Ltd., ) Madam Justice Fisher reviewed the Hardwoods decision and concluded that it is not necessary for a party to adduce specific evidence about the use to which a party would have put the money that is owed (para. 11). In the end she awarded the prime rate of interest.
232  A distinguishing feature of both of these judgments is that that they involved so-called commercial parties. In the subject case the plaintiff is a commercial party but the defendants are not. A factor that is at least as significant, and perhaps related, is that the judgments looked at the history of the parties relationships. In the case of Hardwoods there were previous contracts with express interest rates for overdue accounts. In Domtar there were past dealings to consider.
233  In the subject case there is no such history. Further, there is no documentary or any evidence of the plaintiff's practise with regards to overdue accounts with the defendants (or with anyone). For example, there is no reference on any of the previous contracts between these parties to an interest rate for overdue accounts. And another aspect of the lack of any written form of the contract in dispute between the parties is that there is no record of any interest rate for overdue accounts. I accept that this is likely a result of the informal nature of the way the plaintiff has conducted his successful business over the years. The practise has apparently served him well, but it is a problem when there is a dispute over a contract.
234  In these circumstances pre-judgment interest is payable in this case at the Registrar's rate. I also order post-judgment interest in this case at the Registrar's rate.
Summary
235  I make the following Orders and directions:
An Order that the plaintiff is forthwith entitled to a builders lien (the Lien) pursuant to the Builders Lien Act in the amount of <damage type = "other">$223,178.99</damage> against the lands and premises owned by the defendants, legally described as:
PID 000-147-338
Block 39, Section 19, Range 2 West
North Saanich District Plan 1211
An Order that the Lien has priority as against the lands and premises and all rights, titles and interests of the defendants;
An Order that the defendants pay to the plaintiff the amount of <damage type = "total">$223,178.99</damage>;
An Order that the defendants pay to the plaintiff pre-judgment and post-judgment interest pursuant to the Registrar's rates and the Court Order Interest Act;
The plaintiff's application for an Order for sale of the subject property in default of payment is adjourned and will be heard at 9:00 AM on August 23, 2013, by telephone hearing, unless adjourned generally or otherwise by agreement; and
The plaintiff is entitled to regular costs, subject to any application made within 45 days of this judgment (or appeal decision).
J. STEEVES J.
* * * * *
CORRECTION
Released: August 16, 2013
[1] Please be advised that the attached Reasons for Judgment of Mr. Justice Steeves dated August 13, 2013 have been amended as follows:
In subparagraph (e) of paragraph [235], the date for the hearing the plaintiff's application for an Order for sale has been changed to 9:00 AM on August 23, 2013.
End of Document
Zhang v. Law, [2009] B.C.J. No. 1468
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
R.J. Sewell J.
Heard: April 27-30, May 1, 4-8, 11, June 22-26 and 30, 2009.
Judgment: July 22, 2009.
Docket: M061981
Registry: Vancouver
[2009] B.C.J. No. 1468   |      |
Between Candy Hong Zhang, Plaintiff, and Wang K. Law and Tak C. Yung, also known as Tak Chi Yung, Defendants
(92 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Head injuries — Brain damage — Psychological injuries — Depression — Considerations impacting award — Miscellaneous — Action by plaintiff for damages for injuries suffered in motor vehicle accident allowed — Plaintiff continued to suffer depressive symptoms, pain, fatigue, and cognitive impairment caused by mild traumatic brain injury — Remote chance of any significant improvement in plaintiff's condition — Although accident necessary cause of depression, realistic chance plaintiff would have suffered major depression in any event — Taking into account impact of injuries on plaintiff's life and realistic chance would have suffered depression in any event, plaintiff awarded total of $536,234 in damages.
Damages — Type of damages — Categories of — Loss of income — For personal injuries — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Loss of housekeeping ability — Special damages — Expenses and expenditures — Non-pecuniary loss — Action by plaintiff for damages for injuries suffered in motor vehicle accident allowed — Plaintiff continued to suffer depressive symptoms, pain, fatigue, and cognitive impairment caused by mild traumatic brain injury — Taking into account impact of injuries on plaintiff's life and realistic chance would have suffered depression in any event, appropriate award <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$125,000</damage> for non-pecuniary damages, <damage type = "past wage loss">$60,000</damage> for loss of past earning capacity, <damage type = "future wage loss">$300,000</damage> for loss of future earning capacity, <damage type = "future care">$50,000</damage> for cost of future care and loss of homemaking capacity and <damage type = "special">$1,234</damage> for special damages.
Tort law — Negligence — Causation — Intervening causes — Action by plaintiff for damages for injuries suffered in motor vehicle accident allowed — Plaintiff continued to suffer depressive symptoms, pain, fatigue, and cognitive impairment caused by mild traumatic brain injury — Remote chance of any significant improvement in plaintiff's condition — Although accident necessary cause of depression, realistic chance plaintiff would have suffered major depression in any event — Taking into account impact of injuries on plaintiff's life and realistic chance would have suffered depression in any event, plaintiff awarded total of <damage type = "total">$536,234</damage> in damages.
Action by the plaintiff for damages for injuries suffered in a motor vehicle accident. In March 2001, the plaintiff was sitting in the front passenger seat of a small cargo van when an oncoming vehicle, operated by the defendant, crossed the centre line and stuck the vehicle, causing it to collide with a utility pole. The plaintiff's head hit the passenger window when the van struck the utility pole and she lost consciousness. She was treated at hospital and released later the same day. After the accident, the plaintiff suffered pain in her head, right side, shoulder and back and experienced dizziness, nausea, tinnitus and frequent headaches. In addition, an MRI undertaken in December 2007 indicated a large number of lesions in the plaintiff's brain. Prior to the accident, the plaintiff had no injuries or health problems of any material nature. She assisted her husband in a building maintenance and janitorial business and later in the operation of a grocery store business. She also had an active social life which included dancing and socializing with friends. Following the accident, the plaintiff remained at home for two to four weeks, although she occasionally went to the grocery store owned by her and her husband to assist with training of staff that had been hired to assist in her absence. After four weeks the plaintiff returned to the grocery store were she continued her duties as cashier, but was unable to stock shelves or lift heavy items. She also experienced difficulty in remembering the prices of items and had to take numerous breaks throughout the day. She also became very irritable, impatient and grouchy. Shortly after the accident, the plaintiff learned that her husband suffered from a serious heart problem. In November 2001, the plaintiff became pregnant. She developed serious complications during her pregnancy including pre-eclampsia, gestational diabetes and hypertension and at 33 weeks she delivered a still-born child by caesarean section. Following the loss of her baby, the plaintiff was diagnosed with a serious depressive condition and, although she improved somewhat, she continued to suffer from significant depressive symptoms. After the plaintiff's grocery store business failed, she opened an organic meat and produced store which also failed and then took employment at a grocery store. Because of her husband's ill health, she increased her hours at the grocery store, but was unsure how long she could continue to work increased hours due to pain in her neck, shoulder and back and her difficulty in coping with some of the demands made on her by customers. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 The plaintiff suffered a mild traumatic brain injury as a result of the accident, which was a cause of the cognitive problems experienced by her following the accident. The plaintiff's depression was caused by a combination of the motor vehicle accident and the injuries suffered by her, the loss of her child and learning that her husband suffered from a life threatening heart condition. The depression was an indivisible injury and the injuries suffered in the motor vehicle accident were a necessary contributing cause of the depression. The change of any significant improvement in the plaintiff's condition was remote. Although the accident was a necessary cause of the plaintiff's depression, there was a realistic chance that the plaintiff would have suffered a major depression in any event. Taking into account the impact of the plaintiff's injuries on her life and the realistic chance that the plaintiff would have suffered depression in any event, appropriate award was <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$125,000</damage> for non-pecuniary damages, <damage type = "past wage loss">$60,000</damage> for loss of past earning capacity, <damage type = "future wage loss">$300,000</damage> for loss of future earning capacity, <damage type = "future care">$50,000</damage> for cost of future care and loss of homemaking capacity and <damage type = "special">$1,234</damage> for special damages.
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: D.T. Brown, M.P. Maryn.
Counsel for the Defendants: J.Z. Murray, R.D. Shaw.
Reasons for Judgment
R.J. SEWELL J.
1   When sorrows come, they come not single spies but in battalions. Hamlet, Act IV, Scene V
On March 4, 2001, the plaintiff, Candy Hong Zhang ("Ms. Zhang"), was injured in a motor vehicle accident in Burnaby, British Columbia. In the eight years following that accident she has suffered more misfortune than many people do in a lifetime. My task is to determine what part of Ms. Zhang's afflictions have been caused the injuries she suffered in that accident and what part have been caused by events for which the defendants are not responsible. The defendants have admitted that they are wholly at fault for the accident and the injuries which Ms. Zhang suffered in the accident. They say, however, that the major portion of the loss and damage that Ms. Zhang has suffered was not the result of their negligence.
2  Ms. Zhang was born in Shanghai, China, in 1964. She immigrated to Canada in 1991 to join her husband, Mr. Chen. Mr. Chen and Ms. Zhang met while they were students in Shanghai. Mr. Chen was a supporter of the student protest movement in China in 1989. He came to Canada as a political refugee and Ms. Zhang joined him as soon as she was able to do so.
3  In this case Ms. Zhang claims that the motor vehicle accident and the injuries she suffered as a result of that accident have had a devastating effect on her life. It is therefore necessary to consider the evidence of Ms. Zhang's physical and cognitive capabilities prior to the accident. Before doing so, however, I must address the question of Ms. Zhang's credibility.
4  I have one task in common with that of each of the doctors who have given evidence before me. That is, I must assess the credibility and reliability of the evidence of Ms. Zhang and Mr. Chen. That is so because my assessment of Ms. Zhang's condition must be based primarily on the evidence of her and her husband.
5  After hearing lengthy evidence from both Ms. Zhang and Mr. Chen, I have concluded that the evidence which they gave before me is credible and reliable. I did not detect any material degree of exaggeration or over-statement in their evidence. My impression of both of them is that they were doing their best to relate their evidence in an honest and straightforward way.
6  Ms. Zhang was cross examined in particular with respect to two matters touching on her credibility. The first concerned certain statements which she made on her application for employment with Safeway in 2006. Ms. Zhang admitted in cross examination that she had misrepresented her medical condition on her application forms. Specifically, she stated on those forms that she was not a person with a disability, that is, that she had no impairment which would have disadvantaged her in her in her employment or which would cause an employer to consider her to be disadvantaged in her employment. In another form provided to Safeway, Ms. Zhang answered no to the following questions:
Do you have any illness, disability or physical limitation which could prevent you from regularly lifting or carrying 9 kilograms.
Do you have any illness, disability or physical limitation which could impede your performance in the position you are applying for.
Do you have any illness, disability or physical limitation which could prevent you from doing work of a repetitive nature.
7  Ms. Zhang admitted that she had lied in answer to the first question above. With respect to the last three questions she admitted that she had failed to disclose her condition to Safeway. Her explanation for so doing was that she had previously disclosed her condition to Safeway in a job fare at Oakridge and had been told she was not being offered a job. She testified that she was sure she could not get the job with Safeway if she disclosed her condition on this application.
8  While I in no way condone this conduct by Ms. Zhang, it does not persuade me that I cannot rely on the evidence she has given before me. She frankly admitted the misstatement on the application forms. At the time of the application Ms. Zhang was desperate to find suitable employment. In fact she has carried out her duties at Safeway without accommodation. I do not think I can conclude that her credibility before me has been impugned to the extent that I should not accept her evidence because of the answers she gave on the employment application forms.
9  Ms. Zhang was also extensively cross examined as to whether she had tape recorded her interview with Dr. Derryck Smith in an independent medical examination arranged by the defendants. She stated that she could not recall. While that is not something that one should forget, I have concluded that was an honest answer. The tape recording in question was done at the request of her counsel. It should be noted that the tape recording was made before the Court of Appeal decided that it was improper to do so. The existence of the tape recording was disclosed on the plaintiff's list of documents. My impression of her evidence on this point is that she was having difficulty in recalling the circumstances of her interview with Dr. Smith, which took place in September 2005. Ms. Zhang has seen many doctors in the past 4 to 5 years in connection with her injuries. In her evidence she acknowledged that she had met with a doctor at ICBC's request but could specifically recall Dr. Smith. My recollection is that the questions put to her were specific to taping the interview with Dr. Smith. While I have some reservations about her evidence in this regard I do not think that it should lead me to question her evidence in general. I accept that she genuinely could not recall making the tape recording at Dr. Smith's office. It is clear that no effort was made to hide the existence of the tape recording and I do not think that Ms. Zhang would have deliberately misstated her recollection in this regard.
10  Ms. Zhang and Mr. Chen met when they were both members of a student association in Shanghai in the late 1980s. Both Mr. Chen and Ms. Zhang state that Ms. Zhang was a very good student and the recipient of a number of scholarships in China. She was also appointed to the executive of the Shanghai Students' Association. Both Ms. Zhang and Mr. Chen testified that this appointment was an indication that Ms. Zhang was highly regarded by the officials in charge of the educational system in Shanghai. Ms. Zhang completed a course in financial accounting and was hired to work for what she describes as the China Bank, in 1987. Mr. Chen also worked briefly for the Bank of China as a financial specialist. While in China, both Mr. Chen and Ms. Zhang studied English as a second language. Ms. Zhang's plan was to improve her English language skills to the point where she could hope to obtain employment with one of the foreign banks, which were at that time being allowed to establish offices in Shanghai.
11  The couple married in October of 1989. Their lives and the lives of many others were changed dramatically by the events in China in the late 1980s. Mr. Chen became involved in assisting with the financing of the students protest movement, which culminated in the Tiananmen Square incident. In October 1989, he was forced to leave China and come to Canada as a political refugee. As soon as he was able, he sponsored Ms. Zhang to come to Canada and she immigrated and arrived here in December of 1991.
12  When Mr. Chen first came to Canada, he worked as an assistant cook and as a janitor and building maintenance person. Ms. Zhang assisted Mr. Chen with his building maintenance and janitorial business when she joined him. They were responsible for the cleaning of a 7-storey office building. Both Ms. Zhang and Mr. Chen worked full weekly shifts as janitorial workers between 5:30 p.m. and 12:30 a.m. The evidence of both, which I accept, is that Ms. Zhang was physically capable of working full time as a janitor cleaning this office building.
13  The couple's long-term plan was to establish a business of their own. In 1996, they opened the D-Top Food Market in Burnaby. This was a grocery store of approximately 5,000 square feet. Mr. Chen was the sole shareholder of the company that owned the D-Top Food Market, but both Mr. Chen and Ms. Zhang devoted their full time and attention to the business from the time it opened until the time of the accident.
14  Mr. Chen states that business increased steadily between 1996 and 2001. While this appears to be true, the financial statements provided to me also indicated that the business was not profitable. Mr. Chen and Ms. Zhang were able to sustain themselves from the income of the business. However, they were able to do so only by working long hours, seven days a week, at the market.
15  Notwithstanding these long working hours, both Mr. Chen and Ms. Zhang state that they had an active and happy social life up to the time of the accident. They state that they enjoyed going to movies together and ballroom dancing. Ms. Zhang particularly enjoyed socializing with friends, although Mr. Chen was not so enthusiastic about this activity. Mr. Chen also testified that the couple enjoyed happy and fulfilling marital relations.
16  The couple divided their duties at the D-Top Market. Ms. Zhang primarily worked as a cashier, but she also stocked shelves and helped with the cleaning. Mr. Chen worked at the back of the store. They usually went to work together in the morning. Typically they would arrive at the store between 9:00 a.m. and 9:30 a.m. The store hours were 9:30 a.m. to 7:30 p.m. After the store closed, the couple would clean up and usually leave between 8:30 p.m. and 9:00 p.m.
17  The couple did employ casual, part-time help to assist them up to the time of the accident. Mr. Chen described this help as neighbourhood women who were looking for some part-time work during the day. The part-time employees were principally employed stocking shelves. Ms. Zhang's time was principally taken up as a cashier.
18  Both Mr. Chen and Ms. Zhang testified that Ms. Zhang was popular with her customers and that she was friendly and approachable to them. While working at the store, Ms. Zhang communicated with her customers primarily in English. She also was able to learn and use a few sentences of Japanese and Vietnamese to assist in dealing with those customers who spoke those languages. She also, of course, communicated with Mandarin speakers in Mandarin if they wished.
19  Prior to the accident, both Mr. Chen and Ms. Zhang testified that Ms. Zhang had no injuries or health problems of any material nature. They both describe Ms. Zhang as having a happy, outgoing and friendly disposition.
20  The accident in this case occurred on March 4, 2001. Mr. Chen was driving a small cargo van, which was loaded with supplies for the D-Top Market. Ms. Zhang was sitting in the front passenger seat. The undisputed evidence is that she was wearing a shoulder belt and that the head rest in the vehicle was properly adjusted. Shortly before 9:00 a.m., Mr. Chen was driving east along Imperial Street in Burnaby, near McKay. An oncoming car, operated by the defendant, crossed the centre line and struck Mr. Chen's van on the left side just behind the driver's door. Either the impact of the collision or the momentum of the defendants' vehicle then drove the van to the right where it collided with a utility pole just behind the passenger's door. Both vehicles were extensively damaged. Both Mr. Chen and Ms. Zhang report that they loss consciousness briefly. Mr. Chen states that he was awakened by passersby knocking on the window of the van.
21  Mr. Chen testified that he felt two impacts in the accident. He states that he could hear his wife's head hit the right window and bounce back when the van hit the utility pole. He says that he lost consciousness briefly, and woke up and saw that his wife's eyes were closed. He has no idea how long he was unconscious but he can state definitely that his wife was not moving or responsive when he regained his senses. Mr. Chen said that the police and ambulance attendants arrived at the scene soon after the accident. Immediately before that passersby knocked on the window of the van but his wife did not respond. He says that he revived his wife by shaking and speaking to her after which other people arrived to help. Ms. Zhang recalls hitting her head on the side window of the van. She reports that she lost consciousness.
22  On the basis of the above evidence I conclude that Ms. Zhang did strike her head and did lose consciousness briefly in the course of the accident. These findings will be of importance in assessing the nature and extent of her injuries.
23  The couple were taken to Royal Columbia Hospital by ambulance and treated at the emergency ward there. They were released later in the day and driven home by a friend. Mr. Chen returned to work that day, but Ms. Zhang remained at home to rest.
24  After the accident Ms. Zhang suffered a number of symptoms. While she was at the hospital Ms. Zhang reported that she felt lots of pain in her head. She recalls feeling very dizzy and feeling like everything around her in the room was moving. She remembers having a cut on her lip and when she was able to look in the mirror noticing that her face was red and swollen on the right side as was her neck.
25  Ms. Zhang went to see Dr. Lee, her family physician, the next day as she was continuing to feel pain on her right side, experience dizziness and have pain in her shoulder.
26  In the two to four weeks immediately following her accident, she rested at home although she occasionally did go back to the D-Top Market to help train workers who had been hired to help out in her absence. The D-Top Market had two rooms at the back of the store where she was able to sit and lie down if she felt it was necessary to do so. In the period of time after the accident and before the D-Top Market closed Ms. Zhang said she had to take frequent rest breaks after she returned to work.
27  Ms. Zhang described her symptoms after the accident in more detail. She says that she felt like her neck was being squeezed hard causing her pain which stayed all the time. She described her back as feeling like a large piece of stone had been placed on it and says that she felt heavy throughout her whole body and had soreness throughout her entire back. Shortly after the accident she began to notice and feel pain in the area of her tailbone which did not go away.
28  Ms. Zhang also reported that she suffered from frequent headaches in the period after the accident, those headaches being principally on the right side of her head. She reports that she often felt as though the floor on which was standing or walking was on a slope. Within a few days of the accident she began to experience dizziness and nausea although she cannot recall whether she did in fact vomit. She reported tinnitus in her ear for the first time shortly after the accident. The episodes of tinnitus lasted a few minutes each. She also reported that she was no longer able to tolerate loud noises or even noises which other people would not characterize as being unduly loud. Generally she felt tired and lethargic.
29  As indicated above, Ms. Zhang returned to work at the D-Top Market approximately four weeks after the accident. She returned to her duties as a cashier but she was not able to stock goods on the shelves or lift the cases that she formally could. When she returned to work she noticed that she had trouble remembering prices of goods in the store. The D-Top Market did not have scanning equipment and the cashiers therefore had to remember the price of most goods. She says that she found it very difficult to memorize the new produce prices each day and would make mistakes that she never made before the accident. Ms. Zhang says that she averaged eight to nine breaks a day, and that when she took a break and rested she noticed a lessening of the pain in her back, shoulders and neck.
30  Ms. Zhang also reports that after the accident, as she put it, she lost motivation. Whereas before she had been gregarious and outgoing with the store's customers, she now found that talking to customers was a burden to her. She became very anxious about the financial security of the family.
31  To compound Ms. Zhang's anxiety and apprehension she learned shortly after the accident that her husband, Mr. Chen, had been diagnosed with a serious heart problem. This made her more anxious. The symptoms and work pattern I have described above did not materially change throughout the time that the D-Top Market remained in operation after the accident. It closed in February 2003 when its lease expired.
32  Significantly, Ms. Zhang also reports that after the accident she would become very impatient and irritable even when faced with a small problem. She says that she would become very grouchy with her husband. These behaviours were in marked contrast to those before the accident in which she reported herself as being friendly and outgoing and having very few arguments or difficulties with her husband.
33  In November 2001 Ms. Zhang became pregnant. She testified that she had made up her mind to have a baby for her husband. By this I took her to mean that she wished to make sure that she and her husband had children and, in particular, her husband would have children given the fragile state of his health.
34  Her symptoms had not materially improved before Ms. Zhang became pregnant. While she was pregnant she reported that the symptoms continued and that the pain in her tailbone got worse. Notwithstanding these complaints and her pregnancy she continued to work as a cashier at the D-Top store. She reports that at that time standing and working at the cash register would cause pain in the mid to lower back region. She also reports that she was unable to sit comfortably.
35  Tragically, Ms. Zhang developed very serious complications during her pregnancy. She developed pre-eclampsia, gestational diabetes and hypertension. In June she was hospitalized. She delivered a still-born boy by caesarean section at 33 weeks gestation.
36  To compound the family's difficulties business at the D-top Market continued to deteriorate. Mr. Chen testified that up to the time of the accident the volume of business at the market increased by approximately 5% per year. However, the financial statements produced for the market business show that the market never made a profit, although its losses did increase after the accident.
37  Things did not improve for Ms. Zhang after the loss of her baby. Her husband's medical condition remained fragile. In January 2003 she was diagnosed with a serious depressive condition. She had "ideation" about suicide and homicide. Her psychiatrist, Dr. To, recommended that she be hospitalized. However, Mr. Chen was opposed to her being hospitalized. After consulting with Dr. To, Ms. Zhang was treated with medication, but not hospitalized. I find that this depression slowly improved beginning in early 2003. However, Ms. Zhang continues to suffer from significant depressive symptoms.
38  After the D-Top Market closed, Ms. Zhang opened an organic meat and produce store on Oak Street in Vancouver. That business, in which she was assisted by her husband, did not prosper. I was shown no financial statements for the business but I understand it was closed when the landlord retook possession of the premises in September 2003. In 2003, Mr. Chen obtained employment with a courier company. He was working in the dispatch centre at the airport in Richmond for that company in January 2007 when he became ill and had to be taken to the emergency ward at the Richmond General Hospital. His illness, which was related to his heart condition, resulted in Mr. Chen being placed on long-term disability with a significant decrease in his income. As a result, Ms. Zhang felt that it was necessary for her to increase her hours at Safeway.
39  Ms. Zhang underwent a lengthy period of counselling. In 2006 she commenced work with Canada Safeway, initially on a part-time basis. After her husband could no longer work, she increased her hours and, since 2007, has worked approximately 32 to 40 hours per week in the delicatessen department in the Safeway outlet located on Davie Street near English Bay. This apparently is one of the two busiest Safeway stores in British Columbia. Ms. Zhang has been able to perform her duties as a delicatessen clerk throughout her period of employment. She has received consistently good reviews from her employer and has, in fact, been recognized on a number of occasions with employee service awards called World Class Service Awards.
40  Ms. Zhang testified that although she is able to work 32 to 40 hours a week at Safeway at present, she does not know how long she can continue to do so. She complains of neck, shoulder and back pain, which complaints are aggravated while working the shift at Safeway. In addition, she finds it difficult to cope with some of the demands made on her by customers, particularly customers who ask her to undertake more than one task at a time. For example she related an incident in which she became frustrated with a customer who asked her for several items in succession. She reports that at the end of a shift at Safeway she is completely exhausted and can do nothing other than rest when she gets home.
41  I think it is fair to say that Ms. Zhang's complaints can be grouped into three basic categories:
pain and physical discomfort;
impairment of cognitive abilities and functions; and
deterioration of mood and enjoyment of life.
42  Ms. Zhang's position is that these symptoms have significantly impaired her ability to work and have virtually ended her social and recreational activities. I do not understand the defendants to dispute that Ms. Zhang's reported symptoms are genuine. From the defendants' perspective the fundamental issues are the cause of those symptoms and the extent to which they have caused any loss of income or loss of income earning capacity.
43  The defendants' position is that Ms. Zhang's current difficulties are primarily caused by complications from her pregnancy and loss of her child in 2002. The defendants submit that the complications included pre-eclampsia and hypertension, followed by severe post-partum depression. They say that these events were in no way caused by their tortious conduct and are therefore not compensable. In particular, the defendants strongly argued that the depression was caused by the loss of Ms. Zhang's child and not by the accident.
44  I must determine the cause of Ms. Zhang's difficulties. To do so I must review the extensive medical evidence presented at trial.
45  I heard evidence from the following doctors on behalf of the plaintiff; Dr. Raymond Ancill, a psychiatrist; Dr. John Du, a registered psychologist; Dr. Shao-Hua Lu, a psychiatrist; Dr. Anthony Salvian, a specialist in vascular surgery; Dr. Ronda Shuckett, a specialist in internal medicine and rheumatology; Dr. Gary Stimac, diagnostic radiologist with particular expertise in neuroradiology; Dr. Andrew Travlos, a physical medicine and rehabilitation specialist; Dr. Gordon Wallace, registered psychologist with a concentration on rehabilitation medicine. In addition the plaintiff filed a report of Dr. Donald Cameron, a neurologist, whom the defendants did not seek to cross-examine.
46  For the defendants, I heard evidence from the following experts; Dr. Jocelyne LaPointe, a diagnostic neuroradiologist; Dr. Derryck Smith, a psychiatrist; Dr. Bernard Tessler, a neurologist; Dr. William Yu, an orthopaedic surgeon.
47  Mr. Russell McNeil, an occupational therapist, provided a report and gave evidence with respect to cost of future care to allow Ms. Zhang to maintain a quality of life as close as practical to that she possessed prior to the accident. In addition, Mr. William Struthers, a labour economist, provided actuarial evidence with respect with respect to certain issues of future care and with respect to the income that persons with certain characteristics might expect to earn over their working lives.
48  I do not intend to review each of the expert opinions in any detail. While I have read and considered them all I will make specific reference to them only when I consider it necessary to explain or define the conclusions I have reached on the many issues before me.
49  I will first deal with the issues which arise from the wide divergence in the medical opinions presented in this case.
50  There was a disagreement on the question of whether Ms Zhang suffered a mild traumatic brain injury (MTBI) in the motor vehicle accident. This disagreement may be further broken down into a number of disputes. The first relates to what happened in the accident and in particular as to whether Ms. Zhang lost consciousness. As I have already stated I find as a fact that Ms Zhang did suffer a brief loss of consciousness in the accident. In reaching this conclusion I place primary reliance on the evidence of Mr. Chen that he observed that his wife's eyes were closed and that she was non-responsive immediately after the accident. In addition it is clear that Ms. Zhang did strike her head against the passenger door window. I am aware that Ms. Zhang scored 15 out of 15 on the Glasgow Comma Scale when it was administered by the ambulance attendants. However it is unclear on the evidence when the test was actually administered. It appears that it was administered sometime after she was removed from the vehicle, probably in the ambulance on the way to the hospital. By that time she had regained consciousness.
51  In addition to what happened during the accident I accept that Ms. Zhang did experience a number of symptoms which were consistent with her having suffered a concussion. In the period after the accident she experienced nausea, dizziness and vertigo. Perhaps most significantly, she reported significant memory impairment and word finding difficulties after the accident and before her pregnancy. I do not consider that the difficulties experienced by Ms. Zhang in remembering prices of goods that she had been pricing for years previously to be trivial or minor.
52  Dr. Cameron was of the opinion that Ms. Zhang did suffer a MTBI in the accident. He based this opinion in part on his conclusion that she did experience a brief period of altered consciousness after the accident.
53  Dr. Tessler was somewhat dismissive of Ms. Zhang's symptoms after the accident. He described them as being the "mildest of the mild". I found this comment, as well as certain remarks he made during his evidence, as being indicative of an attitude on his part that Ms. Zhang's complaints should not be taken too seriously. I was particularly troubled by a comment made by Dr. Tessler in cross examination to the effect that Ms. Zhang's symptoms may settle after litigation. Apart from the fact that Dr. Tessler was not qualified as an expert in psychiatry or psychology, the comment was gratuitous. On the whole I formed the impression was Dr. Tessler was straying into the area of advocating for the defence point of view in his evidence. I do not think he was doing so deliberately but he did seem to show a lack of balance and perspective in his evidence.
54  This brings me to a consideration of the area of greatest controversy between the doctors. In December 2007, Ms. Zhang underwent an MRI scan of her brain. It is agreed by all doctors that the MRI disclosed an unusually large number of lesions. In Dr. Stimac's opinion there were approximately 70 lesions. In Dr. Lapointe's opinion there were between 27 and 33, depending on the imagining plane. Both doctors agree that these lesions are the result of some insult to the brain. There, however, the agreement ends. Dr. Stimac is emphatically of the opinion that these lesions were caused by the trauma of the accident. Dr. Lapointe is emphatically of the opinion that they were not.
55  Dr. Stimac's opinion is based on the number of lesions, the fact that in his opinion they were generally proximate to the cerebral cortex, that is subcortical or juxtacortical, and the fact that they were in the frontal regions of the brain. In his opinion the lesions are typical for traumatic shear injury, that is injury caused by the brain colliding with the skull as a result of the forces exerted in the accident. Dr. Stimac was also of the opinion that the temporal horns of the lateral ventricles in Ms. Zhang's brain were dilated. In his opinion this dilation was indicative of atrophy of the brain. According to Dr. Stimac such atrophy is commonly seen as a sequel to a closed head injury and correlates with short term memory dysfunction.
56  Dr. Lapointe unequivocally rejects the opinion that the lesions are associated with trauma from the accident. She found no abnormality in the temporal horns of the lateral ventricles. Contrary to what Dr. Stimac observed, he concluded that the majority of the lesions were in the white matter of the brain and not subcortical. In her written report Dr. Lapointe attributed the presence of the lesions to the pre eclampsia and hypertension suffered by Ms. Zhang in her pregnancy. In her oral testimony she clarified her report by stating that the lesions were indicative of hypertension and that the extensive references to eclampsia and pre eclampsia in her report were intended to be background information helping to explain how the hypertension originated. Although she did not state this in her written opinion, I got the impression from her testimony that Dr. Lapointe could not reconcile the number of lesions present with what she concluded were only very mild symptoms of brain trauma following the accident.
57  I have concluded that Ms. Zhang did in fact suffer a MTBI in the accident. While I am of the view that Dr. Stimac somewhat overstated the indications of MTBI, I equally think that Dr. Lapointe was too dismissive of the idea. On cross examination she affirmed that in her view the most likely cause of the lesions was hypertension. However it was clear to me that the mechanism whereby hypertension can cause injury to the brain requires not only a tendency to high blood pressure but also actual elevated blood pressure. Apart from readings taken during the currency of the pre eclampsia, there is no evidence that Ms. Zhang's actual blood pressure reached levels which would cause the cerebral infarctions referred to in Dr. Lapointe's report as a cause of the lesions. It is true that Dr. Wong doubled the dosage of anti hypertensive medication for Ms. Zhang in April 2007, but that was because of an increase in diastolic pressure.
58  I also find that the MTBI was a cause of the cognitive problems experienced by Ms. Zhang following the accident. In reaching that conclusion I accept that Ms. Zhang did in fact experience a decline in her cognitive functioning after the accident. In this regard I prefer the evidence of Dr. Du to that of Dr. Smith. In my view Dr. Du was better able to evaluate Ms. Zhang's cognitive abilities because he was able to communicate with her in Mandarin, the only language in which she is fluent. Dr. Du was also able to evaluate the significance of Ms. Zhang's academic achievements in China prior to coming to Canada. I accept Dr. Du's conclusion that Ms. Zhang's pre morbid intelligence was in the high average to superior range. To my mind this opinion is reinforced by comparing Ms. Zhang's performance at the D-Top market before and after the accident. I find that prior to the accident Ms. Zhang was an extremely competent and effective person. On the other hand after the accident she was really not able to cope with the demands put on her at the D-Top market, particularly in the areas of memory.
59  While Dr. Smith was unimpressed with Dr. Du's opinion he appeared to have made little effort to investigate this question himself. I heard no evidence to call into question the basis on which Dr. Du made his comparative intelligence evaluation.
60  Dr. Ancill was also of the opinion that Ms. Zhang current difficulties are caused by chronic pain and MTBI. In his opinion the level of any continuing mood disorder is insufficient to account for her ongoing functional impairment.
61  In summary I find that Ms. Zhang did experience a decline in her cognitive abilities after the accident. I have already found that this decline was due in part to the MTBI. I now turn to a consideration of the extent to which depression contribute to these difficulties and to the etiology of that depression.
62  It is common ground that Ms. Zhang suffered a major depressive episode in late 2002 after the loss of her foetus at 33 weeks gestation. There is also general agreement that she experienced some depressive symptoms throughout most of the period between the accident and the trial of this action. The question I must address is the role that the injuries she suffered in the accident played in that depression.
63  Dr. Du is of the opinion that Ms. Zhang was suffering from adjustment disorder with depression prior to the major depression she experienced after the loss of her foetus. His evidence was that the adjustment disorder with depression was a significant risk factor with respect to the major depression Dr. To diagnosed in January 2003. Dr. Ancill was of the opinion that Ms. Zhang suffered from a MTBI, which also is associated with a significantly greater vulnerability to depression and anxiety. He did not specifically agree that Ms. Zhang was suffering from adjustment disorder, but he clearly was of the view that her MTBI and chronic pain significantly increased the risk of her suffering a major depression.
64  Dr. Smith disagreed with the opinion that the accident played any direct role in the major depression suffered by Ms. Zhang. In his opinion the major depression was caused by the loss of Ms. Zhang's child and the depressive disorder she developed was in no way directly related to the accident. This opinion was based in part on his conclusion that Ms. Zhang had no psychiatric symptoms prior to the pregnancy. When pressed for the basis for this conclusion, Dr. Smith based it almost entirely what he described as a statement in Dr. To's clinical records that Ms. Zhang was well psychiatrically until June 2002. I observe that the note from Dr. To, which was made in January 2003, says simply that Ms. Zhang had said she was fine until June 2002 when she lost her pregnancy. To my mind it is important to note that Dr. To's note does not state that Ms. Zhang was well psychiatrically until June 2002. It, in fact, relates a statement that Ms. Zhang made to her. Ms. Zhang was not cross-examined about that alleged statement.
65  Dr. Smith agreed in cross examination that, based on this note, he had concluded prior to his examination of Ms. Zhang that she had no psychiatric issues prior to her pregnancy.
66  In my view Dr. Smith was too dismissive of the significant indications that Ms. Zhang was experiencing psychiatric difficulties prior to her pregnancy and loss of her unborn child. In particular, I conclude that he placed far too much reliance on Dr. To's single clinical record and did not adequately explore Ms. Zhang's pre pregnancy condition. I also find it quite singular that Dr. Smith agreed that chronic pain can be a significant risk factor for depression but failed to address this factor in any detail in his report.
67  In the period between March 4, 2001 and December 2002, Ms. Zhang had been injured in the motor vehicle accident which caused her virtually constant pain and which she believed caused her cognitive difficulties, had learned that her husband had a life threatening heart condition, had lost a child after being pregnant for 8 months, and had terminated a subsequent pregnancy for medical reasons. In my view the depression which either developed or became acute in late 2002 was caused by a combination of the above factors. All of the doctors who testified agreed that chronic pain and MTBI are significant risk factors for depression. I conclude that the depression was an indivisible injury and that the injuries suffered in the motor vehicle accident were a necessary contributing cause of the depression.
68  I do not think it necessary to decide whether Ms. Zhang is currently suffering from major depression or from adjustment disorder with depression, or merely from some depressive symptoms. What is clear is that she has suffered from significant depressive symptoms since late 2002 at the latest. Dr. Du reports that in August 2008 he administered the Beck Depression Inventory (Chinese Revision) to Ms. Zhang and that she reported moderate to severe levels of sadness, failure, guilt, self-blame and hopelessness. In his view, Ms. Zhang's profile was suggestive of a severe level of depressive symptoms. While there is some level of disagreement among the doctors, all seem to agree that at minimum Ms. Zhang continues to exhibit depressive symptoms.
69  I did note that Ms. Zhang demonstrated a flat affect when giving her evidence in the witness stand. This is consistent with the report of Dr. Du.
70  I will return to the role that this depression has played in Ms. Zhang's life later in these reasons. Before doing so however I will deal with the question of whether Ms. Zhang suffers from thoracic outlet syndrome. Dr. Salvian was of the opinion that Ms. Zhang suffered from thoracic outlet syndrome. However the weight of medical evidence before me was that there were not sufficient indicators present to justify a diagnosis of thoracic outlet syndrome. Of course the very concept of whether thoracic outlet syndrome is a recognizable condition is still somewhat controversial. Having considered all of the medical evidence I conclude that the plaintiff has not succeeded in establishing on a balance of probabilities that she suffers from this condition.
71  This is of course not to say that Ms. Zhang does not suffer from chronic pain. Whether the pain is attributable to organic or psychological causes it is very real to Ms. Zhang. The consensus of the medical evidence before me is that Ms. Zhang will continue to experience significant pain for the rest of her life. Any pain which has not resolved in the eight years subsequent to the accident is unlikely to resolve in the future. With the possible exception of the low back pain associated with the probable injury to her coccyx it is impossible to determine whether this pain is organic or psychological in origin. However, given my finding that the injuries Ms. Zhang suffered in the accident were a necessary cause of her depression it is not necessary for me to determine the origin of the pain.
72  In summary I conclude that Ms. Zhang continues to suffer depressive symptoms, pain and fatigue. I find that there has been cognitive impairment caused by the MTBI and the depressive symptoms. I also find that the chance of any significant improvement in her condition in the future is remote.
73  Before turning to a discussion of damages I will briefly address the legal arguments made before me. Mr. Murray's primary submission was that the depression suffered by Ms. Zhang was not caused by the negligence of the defendants. In my view this case is governed by the principles enunciated in the Supreme Court of Canada in Athey v. Leonati . On the issue of causation I have already found that the injuries suffered in the motor vehicle accident were a necessary cause of the depression. To paraphrase paragraph 41 of Athey, I have found that it was necessary to have both the injuries from the accident and the non-tortious causes for the depression to occur. As in Athey, I have concluded that it was the combination of the accident, the effect of Mr. Chen's illness, the loss of the foetus and the termination of the second pregnancy which caused the major and continuing depression. The depression and continuing depressive symptoms are, in my opinion, an indivisible injury. The other sources of Ms. Zhang's difficulties, soft tissue injury and MTBI, are of course entirely attributable to the accident.
74  The analysis of damage does not end with causation. It is still necessary to consider whether there was some realistic chance that the depression would have occurred without the motor vehicle accident. This does not go to the issue of causation but rather to the question of assessing damages which will restore Ms. Zhang to her original position. If her original position included a realistic chance that she would have suffered a depression in any event, the principles of compensation require some reduction in the damages awarded to avoid putting her in a better position than she would have been in had she not received compensation for the accident. It goes without saying that "better" does not mean better in fact but better notionally because she will have received adequate monetary compensation for the damages caused by the defendants' negligence.
75  In this case the analysis is further complicated. Of the three causes of Ms. Zhang's ongoing problems, pain, MTBI, and depression, only depression could be said to have been a realistic chance in the absence of the accident. On the evidence before me I find that, although the accident was a necessary cause of the depression, there was never the less a realistic chance that Ms. Zhang would have suffered a major depression in any event. That realistic chance must be taken into account in assessing damages.
76  I was referred to a great many cases by counsel. I mean no disrespect to the diligence of counsel by not referring to each of those cases specifically. Having considered them I simply do not think that they establish any additional principles applicable to this case to those set out in Athey, as explained in Resurfice Corp. v. Hanke, , Hutchings v. Dow , and the other cases I will refer to specifically.
77  Given my findings as to the extent of Ms. Zhang's injuries from the accident a substantial award for non-pecuniary damages is appropriate. As I have already indicated, my task is to make an award of damages which, so far as money is able, will restore Ms. Zhang to her original position. The evidence before me is that before the accident Ms. Zhang was an outgoing and intelligent person with a positive attitude to life. She was able to combine long hours of work with numerous activities which gave her pleasure. She enjoyed walking and socializing with friends. She and her husband went to movies and went ballroom dancing. She enjoyed music. Ms. Zhang and Mr. Chen also had fulfilling marital relations.
78  All of the above activities have been profoundly affected by the injuries Ms. Zhang suffered in the accident. Ms. Zhang is no longer outgoing but reclusive. Most of her energy is devoted to working her shift at Safeway. At the end of each shift the combination of pain and fatigue preclude her from engaging in social activities. She can no longer tolerate music. The couple no longer goes to movies or dancing. There has been a significant decline in marital relations. While some of these outcomes are undoubtedly related to Ms. Zhang's ongoing depressive symptoms, they are largely the result of the other injuries suffered in the accident. Taking into account the impact of these injuries on Ms. Zhang's life while at the same time recognizing the realistic chance that Ms. Zhang would have had to cope with depression in any event, I award non-pecuniary damages of <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$125,000</damage>.
79  It is very difficult to assess an appropriate amount for loss of past earning capacity in this case. Immediately prior to the accident Ms. Zhang was essentially self employed at the D-Top Market. From the time of the accident to her hospitalization for the complications of her pregnancy, she worked at D-Top, but extra help was also required. I have no doubt that the benefits she received from D-Top are not fully reflected in the amount of income attributed to her on her income tax return. Nevertheless her income from D-Top was modest. In addition Ms. Zhang would inevitably have experienced a loss of income as a result of the tragic circumstances of her pregnancy. I would also make some discount in this head of damages for the realistic chance of Ms. Zhang experiencing post-partum depression even without the accident. Perhaps the best evidence of Ms. Zhang's past income earning capacity is the income she has been earning at Safeway since 2006. In light of all of the above circumstances, I award damages for loss of past earning capacity of <damage type = "past wage loss">$60,000</damage>.
80  By far the most challenging question before me with respect to damages is to determine what should be awarded for loss of future earning capacity. In this case there is more than a substantial possibility of loss of future earning capacity. It follows from the findings I have made above that Ms. Zhang has suffered a significant loss of her capacity to earn income as a result of the accident. This is particularly so given my finding of a loss of cognitive ability. It is trite to say that I must approach this question on the basis that I am assessing the extent of the impairment of a capital asset, Ms. Zhang's capacity to earn future income.
81  Mr. Brown submits that I should assess damages in this category on the basis that Ms. Zhang has suffered virtually a total loss of her income earning capacity, and that I should base the assessment on the assumption that Ms. Zhang had a prior capacity to work at least in a semi skilled occupation. He relied on actuarial tables from Statistics Canada put into evidence through Mr. Struthers to show the range of potential incomes that a semi skilled person of Ms. Zhang's age and sex could expect to earn up to age 70.
82  Before turning to a quantitative analysis of this issue I must make some findings of fact to which that analysis can be applied. At the outset I will address the question of Ms. Zhang's current capacity to earn income. Mr. Murray submits that Ms. Zhang has demonstrated the capacity to retain full time employment at Safeway and the functional testing done by Mr. Wallace does not demonstrate any significant impairment of her capacity to perform unskilled work such as a delicatessen clerk. He also points to the evidence of Dr. Travlos to the effect that Ms. Zhang should be able to continue to work 32 to 40 hours per week at Safeway.
83  Mr. Brown points to the toll that working full time has taken on Ms. Zhang. He submits, relying on the evidence of Dr. Salvian and on Mr. Chen's and Ms. Zhang's testimony, that it not reasonable to assume that she will be able to continue to work to age 70 at anything like her present level.
84  In my view there is a substantial possibility that Ms. Zhang will not be able to maintain her present level of activity at work. Her ongoing pain and depression may well force her to reduce her hours of work. The substantial possibility that Ms. Zhang's current employment is unsustainable must be taken into account in assessing her claim for loss of future income earning capacity.
85  On the other hand I do not think that Ms. Zhang has demonstrated more than a desire to upgrade her skills beyond the level that she has pursued since immigrating in 1991. In the ten years up to the time of the accident, despite working with the public at D-Top Market, her facility in English remained limited. There is no evidence that in that period of time she took any steps to upgrade her skills or qualifications. These factors are of course not responsive to the issue of liability for the loss of capacity but they are factors to be taken into consideration in assessing the value of what she has lost.
86  According to the evidence presented by Mr. Struthers the present value of the income earning capacity of a semi skilled worker to age 67, assuming contingencies for average risks, is <damage type = "other">$632,000</damage>. The same figure for unskilled workers is <damage type = "other">$370,000</damage>. The difference between the two figures is <damage type = "other">$262,000</damage> (all figures are rounded to the nearest <damage type = "other">$1000</damage>). However, simply awarding this difference does not take into account the substantial possibility that Ms. Zhang will not be able to sustain her present employment. On the other hand it also fails to recognize the substantial obstacles that Ms. Zhang, even in her original position, faced to upgrading her occupational and language skills.
87  In approaching this question, I find guidance in the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Rosvold v. Dunlop, . In that case, Madam Justice Huddard referred to Brown v. Golaiy . In that decision, Mr. Justice Finch (as he then was) set out four basic considerations in assessing damages for lost of future income earning capacity. I need not repeat the criteria from that case in these reasons. However, bearing them in mind and remembering the admonition from Rosvold that damages must be assessed and not calculated I award damages for this head of damages at <damage type = "future wage loss">$300,000</damage>.
88  Ms. Zhang also makes claims for cost of future care and past and future loss of homemaking capacity. I am not persuaded that I should break down these heads of damage in the detailed way that Mr. McNeil approaches the matter in his report. In my view some of the items he addresses are covered by the award for non- pecuniary damages. I do however think that Ms. Zhang has suffered a significant impairment of her capacity to perform homemaking tasks, particularly of a heavier nature. The total claimed for these three categories is approximately <damage type = "other">$70,000</damage>. I award <damage type = "future care">$50,000</damage> for these three categories.
89  In his oral submissions I understood Mr. Brown to agree to an award for special damages of <damage type = "special">$1,234</damage>, as submitted by the defendants. I award special damages in that amount.
90  In summary I award the following:
 (a) Non-pecuniary damages <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$125,000</damage> 
 (b) Loss of past income capacity <damage type = "past wage loss">$60,000</damage> 
 (c) Loss of future income capacity <damage type = "future wage loss">$300,000</damage> 
Cost of future care, loss of homemaking capacity <damage type = "future care">$50,000</damage>
 (e) Special Damages <damage type = "special">$1,234</damage> 
 Total <damage type = "total">$536,234</damage> 
91  If counsel are unable to agree on such matters as court order interest, tax gross up and tax treatment of the award they may arrange to make further submissions.
92  Counsel may also make further submissions with respect to costs.
R.J. SEWELL J.
End of Document
Chamberlain v. Pro Star Mechanical Technologies Ltd., [2014] B.C.J. No. 2669
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Victoria, British Columbia
G.R.J. Gaul J.
Heard: February 22-24, 27-29, September
24-28, 2012; July 15, 2013; written
submissions, July 26, 2013 (Defendant);
August 9, 2013 (Plaintiffs).
Judgment: October 14, 2014.
Docket: 10-4153
Registry: Victoria
[2014] B.C.J. No. 2669   |   2014 BCSC 1931
Between Tammy Marion Carol Chamberlain and Gary Ronald Chamberlain, Plaintiffs, and Pro Star Mechanical Technologies Ltd. and Trane Canada Co., Defendants
(76 paras.)
Case Summary
Construction law — Liability — Grounds — Breach of contract — Defective workmanship — Negligence — Damages — Action by plaintiffs for damages for breach of contract and negligence allowed — Plaintiffs retained defendant to design and install geothermal exchange system to heat and cool newly built home — Defendant failed to design and deliver proper functioning unit — System was negligently designed and installed — Plaintiffs awarded <damage type = "general">$29,535</damage> for losses and expenses consequential to defendant's negligence and breach of contract plus <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$15,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages for mental distress and loss of enjoyment of life caused by breach of contract.
Action by the plaintiffs, Tammy and Ronald Chamberlain, against the defendant, Pro Star Mechanical Technologies, for damages for negligence and breach of contract. The plaintiffs built a home and retained the defendant to design and install a geothermal exchange system to heat and cool the home. Upon moving into the home, the plaintiffs encountered issues with the system. Although efforts were made to rectify the matter, the system never worked to the plaintiffs' satisfaction. The plaintiffs alleged that the system was negligently denied and installed. The plaintiffs alleged that the defendant breached the express terms of the parties' contract when it failed to install a system that met the performance specifications therein, breached an implied term that the pond required for the system was of sufficient depth, and breached an implied condition that the system would be reasonably fit for the purpose of heating and cooling their home. They sought damages to compensate for the replacement of the system. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 The defendant failed to design and deliver a properly functioning and efficient system in breach of the express terms of the contract. The ductwork installed by the defendant was deficient, the pipes were improperly insulated, the heat pump failed to function as required and malfunctioned consistently. The defendant failed to ensure the plaintiffs were informed of the dimensions of the pond and that the pond was sufficient for the system. Similarly, the system was not fit for the purpose it was purchased in breach of the Sale of Goods Act. The expert evidence established that the system was negligently designed and installed. There was no grounds for finding that the plaintiffs were contributorily negligent. The plaintiffs were awarded <damage type = "general">$29,535</damage> for the losses and expenses consequential to the defendant's negligence and breach of contract plus a further <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$15,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages for the mental distress and loss of enjoyment of life caused by the defendant's breach of contract.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Sale of Goods Act, (a)
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiffs: M. Lawless.
Counsel for the Defendant Pro Star Mechanical Technologies Ltd.: M. O'Meara.
Reasons for Judgment
G.R.J. GAUL J.
1   In 2007, the plaintiffs Tammy and Gary Chamberlain purchased property in Shawnigan Lake on Vancouver Island and started building a dream home for themselves and their two school-aged children. During the course of the construction, the plaintiffs retained the defendant Pro Star Mechanical Technologies Ltd. ("Pro Star") to design and install a geothermal exchange system ("GXS") as a means of heating and cooling their home.
2  The plaintiffs moved into their new house in or around November 2007. Shortly thereafter problems arose with the GXS that Pro Star had installed. Although efforts were made to rectify the situation, the GXS never worked to the plaintiffs' satisfaction.
3  In the present action, the plaintiffs seek an award of damages from Pro Star for breach of contract and in negligence. The plaintiffs' claim against the second named defendant, Trane Canada Co. ("Trane"), was discontinued on 27 January 2012 and consequently it took no further part in these proceedings.
Issues
4  The three principal questions to answer in this lawsuit are:
Did Pro Star breach its contract with the plaintiffs?
Was Pro Star negligent in the work it performed for the plaintiffs?
If there was a breach of contract and or negligence on the part of Pro Star, what damages have the plaintiffs suffered?
Facts
The Plaintiffs
5  Mr. Chamberlain is a Petty Officer Second Class with the Royal Canadian Navy and has been a member of the Canadian Armed Forces for approximately 19 years. During the time relevant to this litigation, he was stationed and working at Canadian Forces Base Esquimalt. Given the nature and intensity of his work, Mr. Chamberlain was often away from home for extended periods of time and consequently the principal manager of the plaintiffs' household and the de facto general contractor for the construction of their Shawnigan Lake home was his wife, Tammy Chamberlain.
6  Neither of the plaintiffs had ever been involved in the construction of a house before, nor did they have any prior experience or knowledge regarding the design and installation of residential heating and cooling systems, including GXSs.
The Defendant
7  Pro Star is a British Columbia company that was incorporated in 1988. Pro Star's business includes designing, installing and servicing residential and commercial plumbing, heating, air conditioning and ventilation systems, including GXSs.
8  Mr. Wilfred Scheuer is the owner and founding president of Pro Star. Mr. Scheuer holds a certification from the instructor's program in plumbing, heating and air conditioning from Purdue University in Indiana, U.S.A. and is a trade qualified journeyman steamfitter. He is also a certified refrigeration mechanic and gas fitter and a Canadian Construction Association "Gold Seal Certified" project manager. According to Mr. Scheuer, this latter designation is similar to a bachelor's degree in construction management. Finally, Mr. Scheuer is certified by the Canadian GeoExchange Coalition to design and install GXSs.
9  While Mr. Scheuer is regularly involved in the day-to-day operations of Pro Star, including dealing with clients and preparing quotes for projects, he is not generally involved in the actual installation of heating and cooling systems. Since 1988, Pro Star has installed approximately 100 GXSs, 25 of which have been similar to the one it designed and installed for the plaintiffs.
Geothermal Exchange Systems - The Basics
10  A residential GXS has three essential components:
a circuit of underground or underwater pipes outside of the house;
a heat pump located inside the house to which the circuit of pipes is attached; and
ductwork to distribute the heated or cooled air from the heat pump throughout the house.
11  A GXS can either be an "open-loop" or "closed-loop" system. An open-loop GXS uses ground water as its source of energy. In simple terms, a continual flow of water is drawn into a heat pump from an established source (e.g., a well). By means of a compressor in the heat pump, heat is extracted from the water and transferred to the air being circulated in the building. After the energy exchange has occurred, the water is discharged from the heat pump and returned to the environment (e.g., another well), thus completing the "open" circuit. In warmer weather, the heat-transfer process can be reversed and the heat pump can be used to cool warm air drawn from the house.
12  A closed-loop GXS operates on the same energy extraction principles as an open-loop GXS, without the residual discharge of the energy source (i.e., water) into the environment. A closed-loop GXS collects energy from the ground or a body of water (e.g., a pond) via a continuous circuit of underground or underwater pipes connected to a heat pump. An antifreeze solution is circulated through the pipes, and again by means of a compressor in the heat pump, heat is extracted from the solution and transferred to the air in the house. The cooling mode of the heat pump allows for the reversal of this process. Unlike an open-loop GXS where the water is returned to the environment, the antifreeze solution in the closed-loop never leaves the pipes or the heat pump.
The Plaintiffs' GXS
13  In the early part of 2007, the plaintiffs began investigating the possibility of using a GXS as the principal means of heating and cooling their home. As a result of his research, Mr. Chamberlain contacted Pro Star. In his initial conversation with Mr. Scheuer, Mr. Chamberlain indicated that he and his wife wished to have a GXS installed in the home they were building. Subsequent to that conversation, Mr. Chamberlain provided Mr. Scheuer with a copy of the plan drawings for their home. Mr. and Mrs. Chamberlain also met with Mr. Scheuer at their Shawnigan Lake property and escorted him about the property so that he could get a better understanding and appreciation of its dimensions and its surroundings.
14  There were further discussions between the plaintiffs and Mr. Scheuer regarding the type of GXS that would best suit the Chamberlains' needs. Eventually the plaintiffs chose a pond-based, closed-loop GXS (the "Chamberlain GXS"). The Chamberlain GXS consisted of six essential elements:
a pond with sufficient water to act as both a thermal energy source for heating and a thermal energy sink for cooling (the "Pond");
a pond heat exchanger ("PHX") consisting of a series of loops of plastic pipe containing an antifreeze solution, placed at the bottom of the Pond and connected to a heat pump inside the house;
a heat pump to circulate the antifreeze solution through the PHX loops and to extract and transfer the energy derived from the PHX to the house and vice versa;
an auxiliary electric heating coil for use in the event the heat pump malfunctions or cannot extract energy from the PHX;
a forced-air unit to distribute throughout the house the air that has been warmed or cooled by the heat pump; and
ductwork to channel the heated or cooled air from the heat pump to the various rooms in the house.
The Contract
15  Neither party disputes the fact that a valid contract existed between them for the design and installation of the Chamberlain GXS (the "Contract"). The terms of the Contract were set out in the following email dated 6 June 2007 from Mr. Scheuer to Mr. Chamberlain:
Hello.
The quote is as follows:
supply Trane horizontal 4 ton geo thermal heat pump with dual pump package, desuperheater package, variable speed fan option, digital Honeywell thermostat. 10 kw stand by electric heating coil is included also...
fabricate and install geo loop coil pond loop, loops strapped to galvanized fence panels, weighed down with concrete blocks
connect tubing from house to pond loop, charge system with non toxic propylene glycol and water solution
install duct work for air handler and includes for 21 supply air outlets, 4-5 return air grills, one fresh air inlet
connect desuperheater outlets to the domestic hot water tank, note hot water tank supplied by plumber.
The price for the system as described is <damage type = "other">$29,484.00</damage> plus GST.
***
This system will provide heating, cooling, dehumidification and air filtration for your home at very efficient operating costs...
Not included:
any power wiring
bathroom exhaust fans
kitchen exhaust hood
excavation or backfill
if a boat is required to drop in the pond loops, boat supplied by customer.
If you would like to proceed contact me by email or telephone.
16  Within a few days of receiving Mr. Scheuer's email, Mr. Chamberlain contacted him and confirmed that the plaintiffs accepted Pro Star's proposal. Having received the go-ahead from the plaintiffs, Pro Star began work on the design of the Chamberlain GXS.
17  Towards the end of July 2007, Pro Star began installing the ductwork at the plaintiffs' home. Around this same time, the plaintiffs began the excavation of the Pond. The heat pump was delivered to the plaintiffs' residence in August. In September 2007, the heat pump was installed in the basement of the plaintiffs' home and the PHX was installed in the Pond.
18  By the end of October 2007, Pro Star had completed its work on the Chamberlain GXS and had issued its final invoice to the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs paid that invoice which brought the total amount they had paid to Pro Star to <damage type = "other">$31,253.04</damage>.
19  The plaintiffs moved into their new home towards the end of November 2007.
The Depth of the Pond
20  Much evidence was led at trial about the Pond that was needed for the Chamberlain GXS and particularly what depth the plaintiffs were told it needed to be so that the PHX would function properly.
21  Mr. Chamberlain testified that prior to starting the excavation of the Pond, Mr. Scheuer told him that it needed to be as deep as possible and that the loops in the PHX had to be covered by at least seven feet of water. In cross-examination, Mr. Chamberlain disagreed with the suggestion that Mr. Scheuer had told him that the Pond needed to be 20 feet deep. Mr. Chamberlain insisted that Mr. Scheuer had told him that the pipes in the Pond needed to be covered by 7 feet of water.
22  Mrs. Chamberlain testified that she specifically asked Mr. Scheuer how deep the Pond needed to be, when she, her husband and Mr. Scheuer toured the Chamberlain property in the summer of 2007. Mrs. Chamberlain was firm in her evidence that Mr. Scheuer said the Pond needed to be a minimum of 9 feet with 2 feet of water for the loops of pipe and at least 7 feet of water above the loops. Like Mr. Chamberlain, Mrs. Chamberlain was steadfast in her contention that Mr. Scheuer had never told her that the Pond needed to be 20 feet deep.
23  In his examination-in-chief, Mr. Scheuer testified that at his initial meeting in the summer of 2007 with the plaintiffs on their property, he told them that their Pond needed to be 25 feet deep. His testimony included the following:
 Q:  Did the Chamberlains tell you anything else about what they proposed to do with the area for the pond, such as how big they were going to make it, the area, the depth, anything like that? 
 A:  There was a discussion with the Chamberlains regarding the previous contractor that was there, and they brought up some points that he told them about the pond. 
****
 Q:  Did they tell you that they were going to be making it of any particular area or depth? 
 A: I don't recall the exact size, no. 
 Q:  Did you make any recommendation or instruction at that point about the size or depth of the pond? 
 A: Yes. 
 Q: What did you say? 
 A:  I said it was a very small pond for a dew application. The only way it could work is if it was significantly made deeper. 
 Q:  When you say "it was a small pond", do you mean what you were looking at with the weeds coming out of it, two, three, four feet deep? 
 A:  Well that, plus the contour of the road and you could see where there could be a pond. So, even excavating it you are still going to get a fairly small pond. 
 Q:  So, was it what was proposed by the Chamberlains you thought was still going to be a small pond? 
 A: Yes. 
 Q:  Did you tell them of any particular depth that the pond should be, at that meeting? 
 A: Yes. 
 Q: What was that? 
 A:  20... 25 feet is my standard answer now. I might have said more, but I believe 25 feet. 
24  When cross-examined regarding his discussion with the plaintiffs about the depth of the pond, Mr. Scheuer testified:
 Q:  In your direct evidence you said this was the quote that you produced after your attendance at the site of the Chamberlains, right? 
 A: Correct. 
 Q:  And in that site visit, there was no pond that was present. It was simply the intention of the Chamberlains to create a pond out of the marshy area that you observed? 
 A: Correct. 
 Q:  And you did not provide any express direction as to how deep that pond would have to be, did you? 
 A: We discussed it verbally yes. 
***
 Q:  You have no specific recollection of telling the Chamberlains how deep the pond had to be, do you? 
 A:  I do, because they brought up a discussion they had with the previous contractor and they talked about the size of it with him quite thoroughly and they brought that up. 
 Q:  So you have a specific recollection of telling the Chamberlains how deep the pond had to be? 
 A:  The exact number, I do not. But based on our standard procedure, our normal range for ponds is from 20 minimum to 30 feet. 
 Q:  So I appreciate that you are saying what you usually tell people, but that is not what I am asking you. I'm asking you what you said to the Chamberlains for their pond, in terms of depth? 
 A: I can't remember verbatim of that meeting. 
 Q: In fact you can't recall at all. 
 A:  I can recall the discussion because it was a deep discussion about the pond from the previous contractor, so I remember that part very well. 
 Q:  You did not tell the Chamberlains that the pond had to be 20 feet deep, did you? 
 A:  I would have told them 20 to 30, but the exact wording I do not remember. 
 Q:  I did not ask you what you would have told them. I asked you what you did tell them? 
 A: I can't remember a verbatim conversation. 
25  In my opinion, the evidence of the plaintiffs with respect to what Mr. Scheuer said about the required depth of the Pond is more reliable than that of Mr. Scheuer. Both of the plaintiffs were convincing when they testified that Mr. Scheuer had told them the Pond needed to have 7 feet of water above the PHX loops and that there had never been any suggestion that it needed to be anywhere near 20 to 25 feet deep. Mr. Scheuer, on the other hand was vague in his testimony, notwithstanding his assertion that he recalled his conversation with the Chamberlains clearly. The depth of the Pond was a critical issue for the proper functioning of the PHX and the GXS as a whole. Although the plaintiffs were responsible for excavating the Pond, they needed to know how deep they should make it. The only qualified person to tell them and the logical person to tell them was the person responsible for designing the GXS, Mr. Scheuer. In an email to Mrs. Chamberlain dated 17 February 2009, Mr. Scheuer indicated that the pond was "not as deep as originally assumed it would be" (emphasis added). In another email exchange between Mrs. Chamberlain and Mr. Scheuer on 22 February 2010, Mrs. Chamberlain reiterated to Mr. Scheuer that he had told her and her husband in the summer of 2007 that the Pond only needed to have 7 feet of water above the PHX loops. Mr. Scheuer replied with "I do not recall saying 7 feet. That is pretty shallow." Nowhere in his response does he assert, as one would have expected were it true, that he told them the depth of the Pond needed to be 20 - 25 feet.
26  I accept the evidence of the plaintiffs that the Pond was excavated to a depth of approximately 10 feet when the PHX loops were installed in September 2007. I also accept that the size of the pond was increased in May 2008, June 2009 and June 2010, on the advice or direction of Pro Star.
Breach of Contract
27  The plaintiffs assert that Pro Star breached the express terms of the Contract when it failed to install a GXS that met the performance specifications the parties had agreed to in the Contract. Moreover, the plaintiffs maintain that Pro Star breached the implied condition that the GXS would be reasonably fit for the purpose of heating and cooling their home efficiently, contrary to the Sale of Goods Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 410. Finally, the plaintiffs maintain that the Pond's suitability for the GXS was an additional implied term of the Contract, and that Pro Star breached that term by failing to confirm prior to its installation of the PHX that the Pond was sufficient for the purposes of the GXS.
28  The defendant Pro Star says it fulfilled all aspects of the Contract, including the provision and installation of the GXS. Pro Star further asserts that the services and goods it provided to the Chamberlains were of merchantable quality and suitable for the purposes for which they were sold and consequently they met all of the requirements of the Sales of Goods Act. Finally, Pro Star denies there was an implied term of the Contract that it would ensure the Pond was of a sufficient depth for the purposes of the Chamberlain GXS.
Breach of Express Terms of the Contract
29  The Contract between the parties was for the provision of a GXS at a price and with the specifications set out in Pro Star's email of 6 June 2007. The plaintiffs say they did not get from Pro Star what they were entitled to and what they paid for under the Contract; that is, a functioning GXS that provided and had "very efficient operating costs". On the evidence before me, I find that:
The ductwork installed by Pro Star was deficient, including a failure to install the proper number of air outlets;
Pro Star failed to properly insulate the pipes around the heat pump, leading to excessive condensation;
The heat pump installed by Pro Star was unduly loud and vibrated excessively. On one occasion the vibration caused an electrical arc that melted some of the heat pump's wiring, resulting in a strong odour of burnt electronics entering the plaintiffs' living space. On another occasion, the heat pump made so much unusual noise that Mr. Chamberlain was required to turn off the power to the heat pump. When he went to the basement to investigate, there was smoke coming from the heat pump.
When the heat pump was operating and supposedly warming the plaintiffs' house, there was an uneven distribution of warm air throughout the house resulting in a wide variation of temperatures in the various rooms.
Between February 2008 and November 2010, the heat pump malfunctioned and ceased operating approximately 250 times. Most often the malfunction caused the auxiliary electric heating system to engage resulting in a higher consumption of hydroelectricity.
The PHX installed by Pro Star was not connected or installed properly. Efforts by Pro Star between 2008 and 2010 to repair the Chamberlain GXS, were unsuccessful and it was never able to determine why the GXS did not operate as it was supposed to.
The Chamberlain GXS continued to fail throughout 2010 and into 2011. In particular, the heat pump continued to malfunction and cease operating. In May 2011, Jason Rockson of Mercury Refrigeration Products & Services Ltd., ("Mercury"), a competitor of Pro Star who had been retained by Pro Star to assist in investigating the problems with the Chamberlain GXS, was hired by the plaintiffs to remove and replace the GSX, including the PHX that had been installed by Pro Star. In December 2011, Mercury installed a new heat pump and adapted the ductwork in the plaintiffs' home.
Since the installation of the new GXS by Mercury, the plaintiffs have not faced the problems they did with their former GXS.
30  In my view the plaintiffs are correct when they claim that Pro Star failed to design and deliver a properly functioning and efficient GXS in breach of the express terms of the Contract.
Breach of the Sale of Goods Act
31  The plaintiffs also argue that by failing to provide a properly designed, installed and functioning GXS, Pro Star breached s. 18(a) of the Sale of Goods Act and the implied term of the Contract that the GXS would be reasonably fit for the purpose for which it was purchased. That statutory provision provides:
Implied conditions as to quality or fitness
18 Subject to this and any other Act, there is no implied warranty or condition as to the quality or fitness for any particular purpose of goods supplied under a contract of sale or lease, except as follows:
if the buyer or lessee, expressly or by implication, makes known to the seller or lessor the particular purpose for which the goods are required, so as to show that the buyer or lessee relies on the seller's or lessor's skill or judgment, and the goods are of a description that it is in the course of the seller's or lessor's business to supply, whether the seller or lessor is the manufacturer or not, there is an implied condition that the goods are reasonably fit for that purpose; except that in the case of a contract for the sale or lease of a specified article under its patent or other trade name, there is no implied condition as to its fitness for any particular purpose.
32  In my view this provision of the Sale of Goods Act applies to the Contract, given that Pro Star's regular business includes the design and installation of GXSs and the plaintiffs made it known to Pro Star that they were relying upon its expertise and advice in their selection of a GXS. The "trade name exception" does not apply in this case.
33  Pro Star maintains that the Sale of Goods Act does not require that a product be suitable for every purpose within the range of purposes for which it is sold. According to Pro Star, it is sufficient that the product sold is suitable for one or more of those purposes.
34  The question that I must answer is whether Pro Star breached the implied warranty regarding the quality and fitness of the Chamberlain GXS. In my view, there is ample evidence that, notwithstanding the significant efforts of Pro Star, the Chamberlain GXS never functioned properly and continually failed to provide efficient heating and cooling of the plaintiffs' home. The failure of the heat pump resulted in the plaintiffs having to rely on the auxiliary electric heating coil to heat their home at increased hydroelectric costs. Moreover, I accept the plaintiffs' evidence that the forced air unit and the ductwork failed to distribute the warmed air evenly throughout their home and at times the temperature in the house dropped to the low 60s Fahrenheit.
35  In my opinion, the GXS designed and installed by Pro Star was not fit for the purpose it was purchased and therefore there was a breach of the Sale of Goods Act.
Breach of Implied Term of the Contract: Depth of the Pond
36  The Contract that Pro Star proposed to the plaintiffs and the plaintiffs accepted expressly excluded "excavation or backfill". While the wording could have been more precise, the parties agree this term meant the plaintiffs were responsible for the excavation of the Pond.
37  Although the plaintiffs acknowledge that the creation of the Pond was their responsibility, they point to fact that the Contract expressly required Pro Star to "fabricate and install geo loop coil pond loop". With this latter fact in mind, the plaintiffs assert that the Contract included an implied term that Pro Star would properly advise them of necessary dimensions of the Pond, and in particular its depth, to ensure it was suitable for the PHX Pro Star was to design and install.
38  Pro Star denies that the Contract contained any implied term regarding the creation of the Pond. In this regard, it points to what it says is the clear wording of the Contract that excluded it from having anything to do with the Pond.
39  In Bank of Nova Scotia v. Horgan  (C.A.), the British Columbia Court of Appeal considered and reviewed the law on implied terms of contracts. In doing so the court adopted a number of principles articulated in the jurisprudence of the United Kingdom. At paras. 18 to 20 of his reasons, Hinkson J.A. explained:
[18] The first of those decisions commonly cited in this context is Reigate v. Union Manufacturing Company (Ramsbottom) Ltd. (1918) 1 K.B. 592. Lord Justice Scrutton said at p. 605:
"A term can only be implied if it is necessary in the business sense to give efficacy to the contract; that is, if it is such a term that it can confidently be said that if at the time the contract was being negotiated someone had said to the parties, "What will happen in such a case," they would both have replied, "Of course, so and so will happen; we did not trouble to say that; it is too clear." Unless the Court comes to some such conclusion as that, it ought not to imply a term which the parties themselves have not expressed."
[19] The next case in this line often referred to is Shirlaw v. Southern Foundries (1926) Ltd. (1939) 2 K.B. 206, affirmed [1940] A.C. 707. MacKinnon, L.J. said at p. 227:
"... "Prima facie that which in any contract is left to be implied and need not be expressed is something so obvious that it goes without saying; so that, if, while the parties were making their bargain, an officious bystander were to suggest some express provision for it in their agreement, they would testily suppress him with a common 'Oh, of course!'"
[20] Finally, I will refer to the decision in Luxor (Eastbourne) Ltd. v. Cooper [1941] A.C. 108. Lord Wright said at p. 137:
"The general presumption is that the parties have expressed every material term which they intended should govern their agreement, whether oral or in writing. But it is well recognized that there may be cases where obviously some term must be implied if the intention of the parties is not to be defeated, some term of which it can be predicated that "it goes without saying," some term not expressed but necessary to give the transaction such business efficacy as the parties must have intended."
40  In my opinion, it was logical and necessary that Pro Star should inform the plaintiffs of the essential dimensions of the Pond and would ensure the Pond was sufficient and appropriate before installing the PHX. In my view this responsibility of Pro Star's was an implied term of the Contract. It is clear on the evidence that the plaintiffs relied on Mr. Scheuer to tell them how deep to dig the Pond and that without his advice they would not have known what depth was needed for the proper functioning of the GXS Pro Star was designing. The plaintiffs did not have any expertise in this area; whereas Pros Star clearly did.
41  The evidence is uncontroverted that the dimensions of the Pond, including its depth, were essential to the proper operation of the Chamberlain GXS. While Pro Star was not responsible for the actual excavation of the Pond, in my view it goes without saying that it was responsible to ensure the plaintiffs had the proper and necessary dimensions for the Pond before they commenced their work. Moreover, it was incumbent upon Pro Star to ensure the Pond was appropriate before it installed the PHX. Pro Star contracted with the plaintiffs to provide a GXS that worked properly and therefore it had a vested interest in the Pond being the proper depth. It makes no sense to me to suggest, as Pro Star has, that under the Contract it "had nothing to do with the Pond".
42  In my opinion, Pro Star breached the Contract when it failed to ensure the plaintiffs were properly informed of the dimensions of the Pond and failed to ensure the Pond was sufficient before it installed the PHX.
Negligence
43  Pro Star argues that it met its duty of care to the plaintiffs when it installed a GXS that reasonably fit the purpose for which it was intended. Respectfully, I do not agree. In my view the GXS Pro Star sold to the plaintiffs was not fit for efficiently heating and cooling their home and the reason for that was its negligent design and installation, with particular reference to the PHX.
44  Mr. Daniel Booy is a registered professional engineer with a degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Victoria and a diploma in mechanical engineering technology from Camosun College. He is also the president of Altum Engineering Ltd. Mr. Booy testified on behalf of the plaintiffs and was permitted to provided expert opinion evidence on the design, installation and operation of GXSs. Mr. Booy attended at the plaintiffs' residence in January 2010 and observed their GXS in operation. As of March 2010, he could not determine what was causing the on-going malfunctioning of the heat pump. His initial opinion at the time was that the PHX was adequately sized for the Chamberlain GXS.
45  Mr. Booy revised his initial opinion concerning the PHX after he had the opportunity to examine a revised diagram of the PHX and photographs of the PHX loops that had been recently removed from the Pond. In his expert report dated 25 November 2011, Mr. Booy explained his opinion of the PHX as follows:
The BC Building Code references the CSA Standard C448 pertaining to the design and installation of geo-exchange systems:
"9.33.5.2. Appliance Installation Standards
Except as provided in Articles 9.33.5.3. and 9.33.5.4., the installation of heating and air-conditioning equipment, including mechanical refrigeration equipment, and including provisions for mounting, clearances and air supply, shall conform to
CAN/CSA-B139-M, "Installation Code for Oil Burning Equipment," for the installation of oil burning equipment
the BC Safety Standards Act and its following pursuant regulations:
the Gas Safety Regulations for the installation of natural gas and propane burning equipment,
the Electrical Safety Regulation,
the Power Engineers, Boiler, Pressure Vessel and Refrigeration Safety Regulation for the installation of boilers, pressure vessels, pressure piping and mechanical refrigeration,
CAN/CSA-B365-M, "Installation Code for Solid-Fuel Burning Appliances and Equipment," or
CAN/CSA-C448-M, "Design and Installation of Earth Energy Systems." (See also Sentence 9.33.5.3. (1).)"
In my opinion, the installation shown in the above referenced files does not conform to the CSA Standard C448. It is my opinion that the installation of the original non-conforming PHX either led to or contributed to the "lock-outs" that were reported by the Owner. This finding led to a change of my opinion regarding the PHX compared to what I expressed in my review report called "Shawnigan Review Letter - Final Copy", dated March 12, 2010. I had previously suspected that the PHX was adequate to serve the building, but my site visit was on a relatively warm winter day and it is now my opinion that the PHX was operating poorly during colder weather and higher loading scenarios.
The following items caused me to revise my opinion regarding the effectiveness of the PHX:
The three parallel 3/4-inch diameter 600 ft long PHX circuits were connected to 1-inch diameter run-out pipes to convey fluid to/from the heat pump. This run-out piping should have, in my opinion been 1-1/4 inch diameter with four 3/4-inch diameter 600 ft long PHX circuits connected to it. This would provide more flow area in the run-out piping and more surface area in the PHX piping, resulting in more effective heat exchange from the relatively small pond.
All pipes in the PHX should have been high density polyethylene (HDPE) plastic pipes with heat fusion joints only. All PHX pipes not in the pond should have been buried underground. The photos provided to me show metallic fittings with above ground components. In addition to losing energy from being exposed to the surface air, the installed fittings wouldn't, in my opinion, be dependable in the long term. CSA Standard C448 indicates that all piping should be fused HDPE buried underground.
The PHX circuits (bundles of piping) shown in the photos are not, in my opinion, acceptably configured to optimize heat transfer into the pipes. In my opinion, PHX circuits should be well spaced in a configuration similar to that shown in the new installation photos.
In my opinion, the size of the pond should have triggered the installer to provide longer, well-spaced piping. Due to the layout of the PHX, it is my opinion that the PHX would not have provided an adequate amount of thermal energy to the heat pump. In my opinion, that would eventually lead to lock-outs of the heat pump during cooler weather events.
In addition to causing these "lock-outs", it is my opinion that the non-conforming PHX would have caused undue stress on the heat pump and that the life expectancy of the heat pump would have been compromised due to the operating condition resulting from connection to the PHX.
The provision of the above referenced data allows me to firmly stand behind my opinion that the PHX was a leading cause of system failure in this installation.
46  In Mr. Booy's opinion, the PHX loops should have been laid out on the bottom of the Pond in a "slinky" fashion instead of simply piled on top of themselves with random spacers placed between the coils. He also opined that the ductwork installed by Pro Star was substandard in that it did not provide a reasonably even or balanced flow of warm or cool air throughout the plaintiffs' home.
47  Pro Star is critical of Mr. Booy's evidence and submits I should give it little weight because he was biased and more of an advocate in the plaintiffs' favour than an impartial expert witness. Although Mr. Booy did have an ongoing dialogue with the plaintiffs during the preparation of his expert report, I do not find this compromised his ability to be an impartial expert witness. In my view Mr. Booy testified in a direct, fair and objective manner regarding the scientific principles of GXSs and the standards expected of those who design and install these systems. Overall I found him to be a credible and reliable witness and I have accepted his evidence in its entirety, including his expert opinion on the Chamberlain GXS.
48  Both sides agree they discussed the depth of the Pond before it was excavated and in my view this confirms Pro Star knew and accepted that it had a role to play in the creation of the Pond. In my opinion, Pro Star did not examine the Pond properly, either prior to the installation of the PHX or when the problems with the GXS began to arise. This led Mr. Scheuer to blindly recommend to the plaintiffs that they keep making the Pond deeper. In good faith, the plaintiffs followed this advice. The result however was unnecessary trouble and expense for them, without any relief from the problems they were having with their GXS.
49  Pro Star's key failure and the element that created most of the difficulties associated with the Chamberlain GXS is the fact that the PHX loops were coiled on top of themselves and not spread out in the recommended "slinky" style to maximize the available PHX surface for heat exchange. While such a style is not mandatory, the evidence before me is that it is clearly the preferred and recommended approach and the one that makes the most geothermal sense. Mr. Scheuer was not present when the PHX was installed in the Pond. He left that task to his employees and in my view it was incumbent upon him to ensure they knew what they were doing. I am not satisfied he met that standard or that his employees were sufficiently aware of what was required for the proper installation of the PHX. Nor am I satisfied that Pro Star met the standard of care expected of it when it initially installed the PHX loops incorrectly and failed to address the problem in a timely and effective manner.
50  Pro Star was also negligent in the installation of the heat pump itself and the ductwork in the house. The heat pump was unreasonably noisy and vibrated excessively. It was not installed on a vibration pad, as is the norm, but instead on wooden blocks. Pro Star attempted to address air flow issues in the plaintiffs' home but never did provide the number of air outlets required under the Contract.
51  In my view, Pro Star did not meet the CSA standards for the proper design and installation of a GXS, nor did it meet the generally accepted practice standards used in the industry. The plaintiffs summarize their criticism of Pro Star's approach to the PHX as follows:
Rather than design an appropriate pond loop system, Pro Star took the pond loop coils, strapped them in a pile and sank them to some unknown depth in the pond, and then hoped that the heat exchange system would perform correctly.
52  In my opinion, the plaintiffs' assessment of Pro Star's approach to the PHX is accurate. When shown pictures of the PHX loops, Mr. Booy explained that they were not in conformity with the prevailing CSA Standard C448 and summarized his opinion by noting "What I saw, quite frankly, was appalling". I accept Mr. Booy's opinion.
Contributory Negligence of the Plaintiffs
53  Pro Star maintains that the Plaintiffs were contributorily negligent when they failed to follow Mr. Scheuer's direction that the Pond be excavated to a depth of 20 to 25 feet. Pro Star also asserts that the plaintiffs were aware that the Pond was of insufficient depth and failed to take the appropriate steps to rectify the situation.
54  In my opinion, there are no grounds to find the plaintiffs contributorily negligent. To begin with, I reject Pro Star's contention that Mr. Scheuer told the plaintiffs that the Pond needed to be 20 to 25 feet deep. Mr. Scheuer's evidence on this point was not clear and it was definitely not persuasive. The plaintiffs relied upon Mr. Scheuer's expertise and advice and created a Pond that allowed for 7 feet of water above the PHX loops. Moreover, they did their best to comply with what he told them after the PHX was installed and the GXS started malfunctioning. On three separate occasions they increased the Pond's capacity and each time it was as a result of Mr. Scheuer's advice. Moreover, whenever Mr. Scheuer suggested some other cause for the problems (e.g., poor supply of hydroelectricity), the plaintiffs took prompt action to investigate only to have their efforts prove fruitless.
Damages
55  The plaintiff seeks an award of damages for the losses and expenses they incurred as a result of Pro Star's negligence and failure to comply with the Contract. They also seek an award of non-pecuniary damages for the mental and emotional distress they have suffered, including loss of enjoyment of life, as a result of Pro Star's failure to provide them with a properly functioning GXS for their home.
56  In Joubarne v. Loodu, , Madam Justice Arnold-Bailey addressed the issue of damages arising from a breach of contract and the Sale of Goods Act. At paras. 49 and 50, Justice Arnold-Bailey observed:
[49] The SGA confirms that in the event of a breach of condition, a buyer may claim damages for non-delivery. These damages may be regarded as "consequential damages" because they are for the estimated loss directly and naturally resulting from the seller's breach.
[50] Under the SGA there are limits to a buyer's right to reject goods for breach of a condition. Under s. 15(4), if a buyer has accepted the goods, then a breach of condition must be treated as a breach of warranty. If this happens, the buyer's remedy is a claim for damages pursuant to s. 56, which states:
If there is a breach of warranty by the seller, or if the buyer elects, or is compelled, to treat any breach of a condition on the part of the seller as a breach of warranty, the buyer is not merely because of the breach of warranty entitled to reject the goods, but the buyer may
set up against the seller the breach of warranty in diminution or extinction of the price, or
maintain an action against the seller for damages for the breach of warranty.
The measure of damages for breach of warranty is the estimated loss directly and naturally resulting, in the ordinary course of events, from the breach of warranty.
57  The plaintiffs say the excess heating and hot water costs they were required to pay on account of Pro Star's actions amount to approximately <damage type = "other">$7,000</damage>. The plaintiffs claim these costs resulted from the GXS's failure and in particular the heat pump's malfunctioning which caused the more expensive auxiliary electrical heating coil to be engaged. Pro Star submits there was no evidence led at trial to support this claim or that would allow the court to infer the amount of additional hydroelectric expenses the plaintiffs may have incurred as a result of any act of Pro Star. In my view Pro Star is correct on this point. While I accept the auxiliary electrical heating system needed to be used more often than anticipated, I am not satisfied that I have the evidence necessary to determine the cost differential between using this auxiliary system as opposed to the heat pump. As such, this claim for damages is denied.
58  The plaintiffs' claim for <damage type = "other">$81.74</damage> for the cost of "supply materials" from Staples Canada is equally vague and unsupported. This claim is denied as well.
59  I accept that the plaintiffs received inaccurate advice and directions from Pro Star regarding the electrical wiring required for the GXS and therefore its consequential claim for <damage type = "other">$400.00</damage> for the rewiring that was required is allowed.
60  When the plaintiffs' troubles began with their GXS they naturally contacted Pro Star for assistance. They relied upon Pro Star to repair the system and fix the problems. On more than one occasion, Mr. Scheuer told the plaintiffs the root of the problem was their Pond and that it needed to be made deeper. The plaintiffs dutifully followed Mr. Scheuer's advice and raised the level of the Pond three times. In May 2008 they engaged the services of Taz Excavating. The cost to raise the Pond was <damage type = "other">$5,528.40</damage>, plus <damage type = "other">$1,500</damage> for "blasted rock for retaining the driveway". The total, with tax, was <damage type = "other">$9,146.82</damage>. In June 2009, the plaintiffs paid Mr. Marty Fyfe <damage type = "other">$1,086.75</damage> to raise the pond further. Finally, in June 2010, the plaintiffs paid Malahat Landscape <damage type = "other">$2,160</damage> to raise the pond even further. There was also a charge of <damage type = "other">$3,200</damage> for "crushed rock to repair driveway including trucking", which brought the amount paid to Malahat Landscape to <damage type = "other">$5,628</damage>. In total the plaintiffs paid <damage type = "other">$15,861.57</damage> to have the size of the Pond increased. In my opinion most of those expenses were incurred as a direct result of Pro Star's negligent advice and its breach of the implied term of the Contract regarding the proper depth and size of the Pond. I am not, however, convinced that the expenses associated with "blasted rock" or "crushed rock" are sufficiently linked to Pro Star's actions or advice so as to render them consequential damages. I find the plaintiffs are entitled to <damage type = "general">$11,200.00</damage> from Pro Star.
61  The GXS Pro Star supplied to the plaintiffs was defective and it never performed to the level it was supposed to. In my opinion, the plaintiffs were justified in retaining Mercury to design and install a new GXS. The cost associated with the new PHX was approximately <damage type = "other">$8,475.00</damage>. Although Trane supplied the plaintiffs with a new heat pump, free of charge, Mercury charged the plaintiffs $7,175.00 to install it and connect it to the PHX. In my view these costs are compensable damages as consequential losses resulting directly from the actions and negligence of Pro Star.
62  The plaintiffs further assert that they incurred the following costs on account of Pro Star's breach of the Contract and negligence:
<damage type = "other">$144.48</damage> to Tower Fence Products Ltd., for galvanized tension wire and aluminium ties;
<damage type = "other">$874.72</damage> to Draycore Construction Ltd., for the supply of rock for the plaintiffs' driveway;
<damage type = "other">$2,284.80</damage> to Ed Brennan Excavating Ltd., for the excavation of the trench from the plaintiffs' house to the PHX;
<damage type = "other">$1,3010.40</damage> to Ed Brennan Excavating Ltd., for repairs to the plaintiffs' driveway;
<damage type = "other">$20.37</damage> to Pro Star for air filters for the heat pump;
<damage type = "other">$616.00</damage> to Amerispec Inspection Services for "EcoEnergy audits" of the plaintiffs' home.
63  Except for the costs associated with excavating the trench between the plaintiffs' house and the PHX, I agree with Pro Star that the plaintiffs have failed to prove the other expenses were directly associated or as a consequence of Pro Star's breach of contract or negligence. As such, the plaintiffs are entitled to the $2,285.00 they paid to Ed Brennan Excavating Ltd.
Non-Pecuniary Damages for Breach of Contract
64  In addition to the other relief sought in this action, the plaintiffs seek an award of non-pecuniary damages for the emotional distress and the loss of enjoyment of life they have suffered as a result of Pro Star's breach of the Contract.
65  In Wharton v. Tom Harris Chevrolet Oldsmobile Cadillac Ltd.,  the Court of Appeal upheld an award of <damage type = "other">$5,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages for the plaintiff's mental distress and inconvenience as a result of the defendant's failure over a period of two-and-a-half years to fix the audio system in a luxury vehicle it had sold to the plaintiff. Writing for the majority of the court, Madam Justice Levine explained:
[4] ... The problem caused by the sound system breached the statutory warranty provided by s. 18(a) of the Sale of Goods Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 410, that the automobile was reasonably fit for the purpose for which it was purchased. Non-pecuniary damages (of a modest amount) for mental distress (including anxiety, frustration and inconvenience) caused by the breach of warranty of fitness are recoverable "when the subject-matter of the contract is to provide peace of mind or freedom from distress" (Warrington v. Great-West Life Assurance Co.  (B.C.C.A.) at para. 19 per Newbury J.A.), and for "physical inconvenience and discomfort caused by the breach and mental suffering directly related to that inconvenience and discomfort" (Farley v. Skinner, [2001] 3 W.L.R. 899, [2001] H.L.J. No. 49 (H.L.) at paras. 14-16). In my view, both of these conditions apply in this case. The appellant did not raise the matter of mitigation at trial or accept the trial judge's invitation to make submissions on costs. In my view, it is too late to raise these issues on this appeal.
66  At para. 57 in Wharton, Justice Levine reviewed the jurisprudence on the awarding of non-pecuniary damages where there has been an breach of contract and neatly summarized the legal principles as follows:
[57] The reasons for judgment in Farley provide a summary and survey of the law as it has developed, in England, to date. They are helpful in analyzing and summarizing the principles derived from Watts, which are, in my view, applicable to the case at bar. In summary they are (borrowing the language from both Watts and Farley):
A contract-breaker is not in general liable for any distress, frustration, anxiety, displeasure, vexation, tension, or aggravation which the breach of contract may cause to the innocent party.
The rule is not absolute. Where a major or important part of the contract is to give pleasure, relaxation or peace of mind, damages will be awarded if the fruit of the contract is not provided or if the contrary result is instead procured.
In cases not falling within the "peace of mind" category, damages are recoverable for inconvenience and discomfort caused by the breach and the mental suffering directly related to that inconvenience and discomfort. However, the cause of the inconvenience or discomfort must be a sensory experience as opposed to mere disappointment that the contract has been broken. If those effects are foreseeably suffered during a period when defects are repaired, they sound in damages even though the cost of repairs is not recoverable as such.
67  In Fidler v. Sun Life Assurance Co. of Canada, , the Supreme Court of Canada addressed the issue of awarding damages for mental distress in cases where there has been a breach of contract. At paras. 44-45, the court opined:
[44] We conclude that damages for mental distress for breach of contract may, in appropriate cases, be awarded as an application of the principle in Hadley v. Baxendale: see Vorvis, . The court should ask "what did the contract promise?" and provide compensation for those promises. The aim of compensatory damages is to restore the wronged party to the position he or she would have been in had the contract not been broken. As the Privy Council stated in Wertheim v. 44 Chicoutimi Pulp Co., , at p. 307: "the party complaining should, so far as it can be done by money, be placed in the same position as he would have been in if the contract had been performed". The measure of these damages is, of course, subject to remoteness principles. There is no reason why this should not include damages for mental distress, where such damages were in the reasonable contemplation of the parties at the time the contract was made. This conclusion follows from the basic principle of compensatory contractual damages: that the parties are to be restored to the position they contracted for, whether tangible or intangible. The law's task is simply to provide the benefits contracted for, whatever their nature, if they were in the reasonable contemplation of the parties.
[45] It does not follow, however, that all mental distress associated with a breach of contract is compensable. In normal commercial contracts, the likelihood of a breach of contract causing mental distress is not ordinarily within the reasonable contemplation of the parties. It is not unusual that a breach of contract will leave the wronged party feeling frustrated or angry. The law does not award damages for such incidental frustration. The matter is otherwise, however, when the parties enter into a contract, an object of which is to secure a particular psychological benefit. In such a case, damages arising from such mental distress should in principle be recoverable where they are established on the evidence and shown to have been within the reasonable contemplation of the parties at the time the contract was made. The basic principles of contract damages do not cease to operate merely because what is promised is an intangible, like mental security.
68  The plaintiffs were building their family dream-home. They wished to set a good example for their children and consequently they were diligent in their efforts to ensure their home was built using environmentally sensitive methods. They contracted with and relied on Pro Star to provide them with a properly functioning GXS that would be energy efficient and effective at ensuring the temperature in their home remained at a steady and comfortable level. Instead of having a peaceful and comfortably warmed and cooled home by means of an energy conserving environmentally-friendly GXS, the plaintiffs embarked upon a three-year odyssey of hit and miss attempts by Pro Star to remedy what was clearly a defective GXS. The plaintiffs endured three winters of ineffective home heating and increased hydroelectric bills. Their use and enjoyment of their home was diminished during this time because of the noise, vibration and continuing malfunctions of the heat pump. It was only after the entire GXS was replaced by a company other than Pro Star that the plaintiffs' home began to be heated and cooled properly. In my respectful opinion, the Contract falls into the "peace of mind" category explained in Wharton.
69  In arriving at the quantum of non-pecuniary damages for the plaintiffs, I have kept in mind Justice Levine's words of caution at para. 63 in Wharton that an award of damages for mental distress from a breach of contract should be "restrained and modest".
70  In Kaira v. Nelson, , the court awarded the plaintiffs <damage type = "other">$25,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages for the loss of enjoyment of their home and the permanent diminution of its value following the defendant home inspector's failure to identify a permanent defect in the home prior to the plaintiffs purchasing it.
71  In Commercial Electronics Ltd. v. Savics, , the court awarded <damage type = "other">$10,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages against an electronics company that had breached its contract with a property owner when it failed to install a properly functioning deluxe entertainment centre in the owner's home.
72  The plaintiffs argue that the amount of distress and aggravation they had to endure over a period of three years warrants an award of non-pecuniary damages of between <damage type = "other">$30,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$35,000</damage>.
73  For its part, Pro Star asserts that it worked diligently for over three years to determine the problem or problems with the Chamberlain GXS and did so without charging the plaintiffs for its work. As such, Pro Star maintains there are no grounds to award the plaintiffs any non-pecuniary damages.
74  I accept that Pro Star made a genuine attempt to resolve the puzzling troubles with the GXS it had designed and sold to the plaintiffs. Be that as it may, the stress on the Chamberlain family in having to live in a new home that was not properly heated and that had a continually malfunctioning heat pump was real and it resulted in a serious strain on the plaintiffs' marriage. While it has taken a significant amount of time, effort and expense to get a properly functioning GXS, the plaintiffs now have one, and therefore I do not find their situation to be as egregious as the one in Kaira. It is, on the other hand, more pronounced than the inconvenience and distress described in Wharton. In my view, considering all of the circumstances of this case, an appropriate award of non-pecuniary damages is <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$15,000</damage>.
Conclusion
75  At the outset of these reasons, I identified the three principal questions that needed to be answered in this litigation. In my opinion, the evidence supports the plaintiffs' claims that Pro Star breached the Contract and was negligent when it designed, installed and repeatedly attempted to repair a GXS that never did perform as required. I find the plaintiffs have suffered damages on account of Pro Star's acts or omissions and, therefore, I make the following award:
<damage type = "general">$29,535</damage> in damages for the losses and expenses consequential to Pro Star's negligence and breach of contract;
<damage type = "non-pecuniary">$15,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages for the mental distress and loss of enjoyment of life caused by Pro Star's breach of contract.
76  If there is a need to address the issue of costs, then the parties may schedule a hearing for that purpose within 30 days of the date of this judgment. Otherwise, as the plaintiffs have been successful in this action, they are entitled to their ordinary costs.
G.R.J. GAUL J.
End of Document
Andrusko v. Alexander, [2013] B.C.J. No. 1161
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Victoria, British Columbia
S.C. Fitzpatrick J.
Heard: December 11-14, 2012 (Fort St. John); February 28,
2013 (Vancouver).
Judgment: June 4, 2013.
Docket: 09-5631
Registry: Victoria
[2013] B.C.J. No. 1161   |   2013 BCSC 985
Between Christopher Andrusko, Plaintiff, and Alison Ellen Alexander and Lee Renforth Hickman, Defendants
(200 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Body injuries — Back and spine — Neck — Soft tissue — Fibromyalgia or chronic pain — Considerations impacting on award — Age of claimant — Action by plaintiff for damages for injuries arising from motor vehicle accident allowed — Parties' vehicles collided while defendant was making left turn as they were driving in opposite directions — Plaintiff suffered soft tissue injuries resulting in chronic back pain and neck and shoulder pain — He was 26, with Grade 10 education, and had history of jobs involving physical labour — Defendant was solely responsible for accident — Plaintiff was awarded $80,000 in non-pecuniary damages, $250,000 for loss of future earning capacity, $10,000 for cost of future care and $1721 in special damages.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Special damages — Non-pecuniary loss — Action by plaintiff for damages for injuries arising from motor vehicle accident allowed — Parties' vehicles collided while defendant was making left turn as they were driving in opposite directions — Plaintiff suffered soft tissue injuries resulting in chronic back pain and neck and shoulder pain — He was 26, with Grade 10 education, and had history of jobs involving physical labour — Defendant was solely responsible for accident — Plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$80,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages, <damage type = "future wage loss">$250,000</damage> for loss of future earning capacity, <damage type = "future care">$10,000</damage> for cost of future care and <damage type = "special">$1721</damage> in special damages.
Action by the plaintiff for damages for injuries arising from a motor vehicle accident. The parties were driving in opposite directions on a major thoroughfare. Their vehicles collided while the defendant was making a left turn. Each party blamed the other. The plaintiff suffered soft tissue injuries that resulted in chronic back pain and neck and shoulder pain. He was 26, with a Grade 10 education, and had a history of jobs involving physical labour. He continued to be employed. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 The defendant was solely responsible for the accident. The plaintiff's vehicle was an immediate hazard when the defendant began her turn. The defendant did not have a clear view of the plaintiff's vehicle. The plaintiff was not speeding, having started from a dead stop at the previous intersection, and there was no basis upon which to assert that he was driving without due care and attention. The plaintiff was a more reliable witness as to the events leading up to the accident. The plaintiff's injuries were caused by the accident. The plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$80,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages, <damage type = "future wage loss">$250,000</damage> for loss of future earning capacity, <damage type = "future care">$10,000</damage> for the cost of future care and <damage type = "special">$1721</damage> in special damages. The plaintiff had constant back pain, which was at times severe; persistent numbness in his left leg on a regular basis; and neck and shoulder pain that largely resolved within a year, although it continued to flare up approximately once per week. His condition was chronic. It mostly impacted his working life, but also his personal life. He established a real and substantial possibility of a future event that would lead to an income loss. He was extremely limited in his career options. He had to rely on his physical strength to make a living. To the extent that his physical abilities were compromised, there was an issue as to whether he would be able to work at labour-intensive jobs into the future. Retraining was not a realistic option, given his limited education. The capital approach to quantifying damages was appropriate, given his young age, his present employment and the uncertainties arising from his future career path. His work ethic suggested that he would continue to work through the pain, but the reality was that employers looked for healthy employees.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Motor Vehicle Act, , s. 159, s. 179
Negligence Act,
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: B.J. Flewelling.
Counsel for the Defendants: S.P. Casey.
Reasons for Judgment
S.C. FITZPATRICK J.
Introduction
1  The plaintiff, Christopher Andrusko, was involved in a motor vehicle accident on January 3, 2008 in Fort St. John. His vehicle collided with the vehicle driven by the defendant, Alison Alexander, and owned by her husband, the defendant Lee Hickman. Both were driving on a wintry afternoon and approaching each other from opposite directions on the same street. Mr. Andrusko hit Ms. Alexander's car while she was trying to make a left-hand turn.
2  Both parties blame the accident on the other, so liability or degrees of liability are in issue.
3  Mr. Andrusko claims injuries arising from the accident relating to his neck, left shoulder, leg and low back. The low back pain is said now to be chronic. He claims non-pecuniary losses, loss of earning capacity, cost of future care, and special damages.
4  Therefore, the issues for determination are:
Who is liable for the accident?
If liability on the part of the defendants is established, what are the proper damages to be assessed?
The Facts
Prior to the Accident
5  Mr. Andrusko is currently 26 years old. He has limited education, having only completed Grade 10.
6  Since he left school at the age of 16 years, he has had a number of jobs, mostly involving physical labour. He started as a fry cook at Kentucky Fried Chicken. From 2002 to <damage type = "other">2004</damage>, he was employed in Edmonton, Alberta as a labourer doing basic carpentry work. From <damage type = "other">2004</damage> to <damage type = "other">2006</damage>, he was employed in Gibsons, B.C. as a car detailer, which job involved cleaning and washing cars.
7  He returned to Fort St. John in <damage type = "other">2006</damage> and obtained employment at Joy Propane earning <damage type = "other">$16</damage> per hour. Joy Propane does some bulk sales of propane, but it is largely a retail supplier of fuel. It conducts its business in two areas. Firstly, it operates a commercial side where commercial vehicles will pull up and load the propane. In addition, customers will come and fill up the normal type of cylinders that you see on barbecues. Secondly, there is a vehicle division where a fuel attendant will fill up a vehicle just as you would normally do at a gas station.
8  Mr. Andrusko was a fuel attendant and labourer. He worked on both sides of the business. As part of the commercial side, he was involved in pumping fuel and dealing with all types and sizes of propane tanks, from small 20 pound ones for the barbecue going up to 100 pound tanks for commercial purposes. When full, these tanks would be almost double the weight as when empty. Thus, dealing with these tanks required physical effort. There was less physical effort required while working on the vehicle side of the business.
9  Mr. Andrusko was employed by Joy Propane at the time of the accident. His boss, Steven Stanway, described Mr. Andrusko as a reliable and hard worker. He also described an incident involving Mr. Andrusko that caused him to conclude that Mr. Andrusko was honest and forthright. Mr. Stanway indicates that prior to the accident, Mr. Andrusko had no difficulty in completing his duties.
10  Mr. Andrusko has been in a long-term relationship with Jody Stroud for about eight years. She is also 26 years old and employed as a receptionist. They met in 2004 and began living together shortly thereafter. They currently live in Fort St. John, and at the time of the trial, they were engaged to be married in the spring of 2013.
11  Mr. Andrusko described himself as having no difficulty in completing his physically demanding jobs prior to the accident. In particular, he says that he had no neck, shoulder or low back pain. This evidence is confirmed by Ms. Stroud, who also said that Mr. Andrusko was in good health. She did not observe any neck, left shoulder or low back pain, or any numbness in his left leg before the accident.
12  Although Mr. Andrusko was involved in a motor vehicle accident in 2003, there were no injuries to his neck and back in that accident.
The Accident
13  100th Street in Fort St. John is a major thoroughfare. It has two lanes of travel in both the north and southbound directions. It also has parking lanes on each side. The cross streets are Avenues similarly numbered such that the numbers increase as you move northbound. There is no traffic light at the intersection of 100th Street and 102nd Avenue where the accident occurred.
14  The accident occurred a little after 4 p.m. on January 3, 2008. Dusk was approaching and it was a snowy day in Fort St. John. The roads were slippery and covered in compact snow.
15  Mr. Andrusko was 21 years old at the time of the accident. He had borrowed Ms. Stroud's 1990 Chevrolet Cavalier to go to work. He had left his job at Joy Propane around 4 p.m. and was driving to the Tim Horton's to get Ms. Stroud a coffee. He was wearing his seatbelt. He denies that he was tired after a day at work or that he was in a hurry to get to Tim Horton's. He turned onto 100th Street around 93rd Avenue and was proceeding northbound on 100th Street in the lane nearest to the centre line. At the stop light at 101st Avenue, Mr. Andrusko stopped at a red light and was first in line with no cars ahead of him. Accordingly, he had a clear unobstructed view along 100th Street. He then proceeded on the next green light, approaching the intersection at 102nd Avenue. He was familiar with the intersection, having driven it many times.
16  At the same time, Ms. Alexander was driving southbound on 100th Street in a 1995 Dodge Neon owned by her spouse, Mr. Hickman. She was approaching the intersection at 102nd Avenue, where she intended to make a left turn. She was also in the lane of travel nearest to the centre line.
17  From this time forward, the evidence from Mr. Andrusko and Ms. Alexander widely differs.
18  What is uncontroversial, however, is that Mr. Andrusko's vehicle struck the right back passenger side of Ms. Alexander's vehicle with the front right passenger side of his vehicle as Ms. Alexander attempted her left hand turn in front of Mr. Andrusko. Ms. Alexander's vehicle spun and ended up facing west on 102nd Avenue, the opposite direction from her path of travel. Mr. Andrusko also veered off and spun around, coming to a stop in the lane of oncoming southbound traffic about three to four car lengths beyond the intersection. He managed to pull the vehicle back into the northbound lane and then parked further up on 100th Street.
19  Mr. Andrusko described the impact as "pretty severe". Both of the airbags in Mr. Andrusko's vehicle deployed. His vehicle sustained damage at the front passenger side estimated at a value of <damage type = "other">$4,227.93</damage>, causing ICBC to write it off.
After the Accident
20  Immediately after the accident, Mr. Andrusko was attended to by paramedics, but he declined to receive medical treatment at the time. The paramedics did notice a seatbelt line on Mr. Andrusko, presumably from the impact, and they suggested that he would probably be sore. A paramedic recommended that he visit the emergency room at the hospital. Mr. Andrusko did not do so, although he says that his neck, left shoulder and back started to bother him.
21  The RCMP also attended the scene, and Mr. Andrusko gave the police a statement. No traffic infractions were ticketed as a result of the accident.
22  After giving his statement, Mr. Andrusko found a camera in his car and went about taking various pictures of the vehicles. He also cleaned out his car while waiting for his friend, Josh Woods, to pick him up. Immediately afterwards, Mr. Andrusko and Mr. Woods went to Wal-Mart to get the photographs developed. He then went home.
23  Over the next few days, Mr. Andrusko had a sore and stiff neck and left shoulder. After a day or two, he started to feel lower back pain. Again, this evidence was confirmed by Ms. Stroud, who observed him experiencing pain in his neck, shoulder, low back and left leg. Ms. Stroud also observed that the neck and left shoulder pain would come at the same time, as would the low back pain and left leg numbness.
24  Mr. Andrusko went to a walk-in clinic in the first few days after the accident and saw Dr. Brussow. Later, he would see his family doctor, Dr. Van Zyl. Dr. Van Zyl prescribed various medications, including sleeping pills, muscle relaxants and anti-inflammatory drugs. He began taking this prescription medication in January 2008 and continues to take this medication as needed to this day.
25  Mr. Andrusko has tried certain treatments over the years to address his injuries. Shortly after the accident, beginning on January 11, 2008, he started to see a chiropractor at North Peace Chiropractic. He regularly saw a chiropractor during 2008 and into early 2009. He obtained some relief but found that the pain returned about a week later.
26  After being disappointed with the results from the chiropractor, Mr. Andrusko was referred by Dr. Van Zyl to a physiotherapist for treatment. He began treatment at Fort St. John Physio Clinic on January 30, 2009 and regularly saw a physiotherapist during 2009 (eleven visits), 2010 (three visits), 2011 (four visits), and 2012 (three visits). He was continuing to see a physiotherapist at the time of trial.
27  Mr. Andrusko also tried massage therapy one time in August 2008 but decided that it did not assist him.
28  Fortunately, Mr. Andrusko only missed one day off work. He returned to his job at Joy Propane, although he was put on lighter duties on the vehicle side. He did, from time to time, lift 20 or 30 pound tanks after that time, but he was no longer involved in lifting the larger 100 pound (when empty) tanks as he had previously done. His new duties involved filling propane tanks in vehicles, which required some bending and turning for smaller cars. Generally, these lighter duties did not stress his lower back. Nevertheless, he still indicated that his back was irritated and would bother him from time to time as a result of his job at Joy Propane.
29  In March 2009, Mr. Andrusko was let go from Joy Propane for fighting with a customer. He then obtained a temporary job as a labourer for about a month.
30  Later, in 2009, he obtained a job at H2Oasis as a delivery driver and bottle washer. He indicates that his job involved twisting, turning and bending, so his back was irritated again. As part of his job, he was required to work with five gallon tanks of water. He left his job at H2Oasis after a change in management and after an issue developed with his employer about a repair bill.
31  In the summer of 2010, Mr. Andrusko obtained a labourer position at DGS Astro Paving ("DGS"). His friend, Jeffrey Higgins, who was working as a foreman there, got him the job. DGS is involved in the construction of roads, parking lots and driveways. This is a seasonal job which requires a rigorous schedule from the spring (April/May) to the time the snow flies (usually November). Mr. Andrusko was required to work 12 to 16 hour days about six to seven days a week. Many of his initial duties included very physical work, including working with heavy materials and manual shovelling. In addition, he operated various pieces of equipment.
32  Mr. Higgins was aware of Mr. Andrusko's low back problems when he was hired at DGS. He gave Mr. Andrusko certain lighter duties as a worker in his crew, but he did not play favourites. Mr. Higgins confirmed that Mr. Andrusko would complain about his back from time to time, although he did not consider Mr. Andrusko to be a complainer.
33  Mr. Andrusko was later promoted to the position of lead hand at DGS in early 2011, which resulted in him doing less labour work and more supervisory work.
34  Mr. Andrusko says that often his neck, shoulder and low back will bother him after work at DGS such that he has to medicate with muscle relaxants when he gets home. He often experiences pain when running equipment that requires him to look behind. When this happens, his shoulder and neck stiffen up and he gets intermittent pain. This happens more frequently by the end of the working season, but it improves over the winter months when he collects employment insurance.
35  Mr. Andrusko continued with his seasonal job at DGS for the 2011 and 2012 seasons. In November 2012, at the end of this season, he obtained a temporary job for about two weeks at Haycove Contracting, where he did snow removal using a bobcat. He indicates that his back bothered him while operating the bobcat.
36  At the time of the trial, Mr. Andrusko had applied for employment insurance and was waiting to hear back from the government. In the meantime, Mr. Andrusko was also studying to get his Class 3 driver's license.
37  Mr. Andrusko's evidence is that he has continued with his employment duties since the accident, but that he has had pain and numbness since that time. His evidence is corroborated by that of Ms. Stroud, who observed him coming home from work at Joy Propane, H2Oasis and DGS in pain from completing his duties. Ms. Stroud also confirmed that his pain was more severe at the end of the season with DGS. She said that the pain was severe at least once a week. She also confirmed that while his injuries have improved since the accident, the level of those injuries has stayed the same for the last two years.
38  Mr. Andrusko's injuries have affected his day-to-day activities. He appears to have help doing the more physical chores at their home, including snow shovelling and lawn mowing. On long drives, he experiences pain and has to stop and stretch to alleviate the pain. He cannot sit long to play video games or work in his music studio. He also has trouble starting the lawnmower. Finally, he is more irritable and cranky in his relationship with Ms. Stroud.
39  In terms of the duration of his injuries, Mr. Andrusko indicates that his neck and shoulder bother him at least twice a week. He indicates that his neck and shoulder are staying the same at this point in time.
40  Mr. Andrusko's complaints about his lower back are more serious. He says that he has low back pain or soreness just below his beltline every day. Some days are worse than others when he experiences sharp pain. He has also had some numbness in his left leg since the accident, which is present all the time. Twisting and bending aggravates the pain. He indicates that on a bad day, about once or twice per week, the pain is 10 out of 10. On average, he rates his pain as 6/7 out of 10. He tries to use sleeping pills, muscle relaxants and anti-inflammatories when the pain is too bad, but he finds that they can make him very drowsy. He says that he cannot function at work when he is drowsy, and given his line of work, he understandably has safety concerns if he is less than alert.
41  Mr. Andrusko does not use any aid for his injuries. He did buy a back belt, but he was advised some years ago not to use it. Although he is not an avid exerciser, he regularly completes exercises for his core and his left leg about three times a week in his home.
42  Mr. Andrusko is also an avid music lover. In 2009, he started a small business named "Too Die for Recordz", in which he operates as a mobile disc jockey for small events. He also constructed his own music studio, where he likes to make, mix, record and produce music. He has invested quite a sum of money purchasing equipment for this venture, although his gross profit from this venture has been nominal: 2009 - <damage type = "other">$4,242</damage>; 2010 - <damage type = "other">$1,085</damage>; and 2011 - <damage type = "other">$1,008</damage>. He describes this more as a hobby, which is evident when he calculates his net income losses for these years.
43  Mr. Andrusko spends considerable time working on his music business, particularly during the off-season from his job at DGS. He can work for eight to ten hours a day up to seven days a week. While he was questioned regarding his ability to sit for so long, he indicated that he was able to get up and move around to alleviate the pain caused by sitting for prolonged periods of time.
44  Mr. Andrusko is very interested in developing his music business to the point of making more money. He has not taken any music engineering courses, nor does he have any plans to do so. He describes himself as more self-taught.
45  Mr. Andrusko is fairly uncertain about his future. He currently plans to continue to live in Fort St. John and stay in the employ of DGS where he makes what he calls "good money" (about <damage type = "other">$52,000</damage> per year). He may apply to be a foreman at DGS in the future. He wants to try to get his Class 3 driver's license, which would allow him to operate larger trucks.
46  He is not sure how he could continue with either his present position or as a truck driver if his low back condition worsened, given the physical requirements of both jobs. He does not see a sedentary office job in his future given his educational limitations. In addition, given his somewhat prickly personality, he quite candidly admits that he would prefer not working in a job where he would have to deal with the public.
Credibility and Reliability of Evidence
47  Credibility arose on two points: firstly, the evidence of Mr. Andrusko and Ms. Alexander in respect of liability; and secondly, Mr. Andrusko's evidence on the damage issues.
48  The factors to be considered when assessing credibility were summarized by Dillon J. in Bradshaw v. Stenner, :
[186] Credibility involves an assessment of the trustworthiness of a witness' testimony based upon the veracity or sincerity of a witness and the accuracy of the evidence that the witness provides (Raymond v. Bosanquet (Township) ,  (S.C.C.)). The art of assessment involves examination of various factors such as the ability and opportunity to observe events, the firmness of his memory, the ability to resist the influence of interest to modify his recollection, whether the witness' evidence harmonizes with independent evidence that has been accepted, whether the witness changes his testimony during direct and cross-examination, whether the witness' testimony seems unreasonable, impossible, or unlikely, whether a witness has a motive to lie, and the demeanour of a witness generally (Wallace v. Davis,  (Ont. H.C.); Faryna v. Chorny,  (B.C.C.A.) [Faryna ]; R. v. S.(R.D.),  at para.128 (S.C.C.)). Ultimately, the validity of the evidence depends on whether the evidence is consistent with the probabilities affecting the case as a whole and shown to be in existence at the time (Faryna at para. 356).
49  If the plaintiff's account of his or her change in physical, mental, or emotional state as a result of the accident is not convincing, then the hypothesis upon which any expert opinions rest will be undermined: Samuel v. Chrysler Credit Canada Ltd.,  at paras. 15, 49-50.
50  I will address the credibility issues below.
Liability
The Parties' Positions
51  As stated above, Mr. Andrusko was driving along 100th Street after the light had turned green at the intersection of 101st Avenue. Mr. Andrusko estimated his speed at 35-40 km/hour although he was not particularly sure of his speed. He indicated in his evidence that he was driving at an appropriate speed and definitely below the speed limit of 50 km/hour.
52  As he was proceeding toward 102nd Avenue, he noticed Ms. Alexander coming into the intersection and that her car started to slide. He could not say for sure whether he saw a turn signal on her car, but he said that this left turn by Ms. Alexander was unexpected and that it occurred just before the crosswalk as he was entering the intersection. He estimated that he was only a car or one-and-a-half car lengths away when she started to turn into the intersection. Mr. Andrusko said that he applied the brakes, but they locked up and he hit her vehicle on the back of the passenger side.
53  There is a significant divergence in the parties' evidence about how the accident happened, and in particular, what other vehicles or pedestrians were involved.
54  Ms. Alexander is 55 years old and lives in Fort St. John with Mr. Hickman. She has lived there for 23 years and she is very familiar with the intersection. She says that she was returning home from the bank. She confirmed Mr. Andrusko's evidence about the weather, in that it was overcast and the roads were snow-covered and icy underneath.
55  Ms. Alexander's evidence is that she turned right onto 100th Street at 106th Avenue, pulling into the right lane (beside the curb) and proceeding south down the street. At about 3/4 of a block before 102nd Avenue, she moved into the left lane so that she could turn left onto 102nd Avenue. At about the same time, she put her left turn signal on. She says that she was travelling behind an SUV, which eventually slowed and stopped just into the intersection. She stopped behind the SUV. From there she says that she observed a vehicle stopped in the northbound curb lane. She also says that she saw a woman stopped and standing on the far corner near to where the northbound vehicle was stopped. She waited to turn onto 102nd Avenue. She says that she looked around the SUV and did not see anything coming. In her words, she said that she had room to move around the SUV, so she proceeded to turn left. As she pulled out, she saw Mr. Andrusko's vehicle coming toward the intersection. She tried to get out of his way; as she put it, she "stepped on" the gas to accelerate her vehicle out of the way. She estimates that she was in the middle of the intersection when the collision occurred.
56  Mr. Andrusko says that there was no SUV in the southbound lane, as Ms. Alexander suggests, or any pedestrian standing on the street corner. Further, he does not recall any vehicle alongside his vehicle going northbound.
57  After the collision, Mr. Andrusko got out of his vehicle and ran over to see if Ms. Alexander was all right. He said that she was getting hysterical and that she insinuated that he was speeding and to blame for the accident. Mr. Andrusko said that he replied that she had made an illegal turn in front of him. Ms. Alexander says that Mr. Andrusko said that he was sorry and that he was going too fast, which he denies. She denies that she said anything to him.
58  Ms. Alexander also says that right after the accident, a woman came up to her and said something to the effect, "if you need a witness, you can call me". She says that this woman gave her a business card. On cross-examination, Ms. Alexander said that this woman was the driver of the vehicle stopped just before the intersection in the northbound lane of travel. She put the card in her pocket. Ms. Alexander does not recall or did not relate the specifics of this conversation later in her conversation with Constable Grainger of the RCMP, but she does say that she gave him the business card and that he later returned it to her. She then put it back in her coat pocket. She has no idea what happened to that business card. She never looked at it, so she has no idea what it said.
59  Ms. Alexander's husband picked her up, as her car was not driveable. She was stiff and sore the next day with some bruising, although she did not seek any medical treatment.
60  Constable Grainger attended at the scene shortly after the accident. He interviewed both Mr. Andrusko and Ms. Alexander. It is notable that the Constable's records, including the near contemporaneous notes taken just after the accident and the interviews, confirm what Ms. Alexander told him about the accident. He says that Ms. Alexander informed him that she was making a left turn onto 102nd Avenue when she was struck by Mr. Andrusko's vehicle. She made no mention of Mr. Andrusko allegedly speeding into the intersection. Nor did she mention anything about a pedestrian stopped on the corner or any other vehicles stopped at the intersection at the time. Finally, the Constable had no recollection or note of Ms. Alexander having given him a business card of a witness. His Occurrence Report, which was provided to the parties, indicates that no witnesses were "carded". He indicates that if he had been so informed, that person or witness would have been contacted.
61  Constable Grainger filled in his report while in his police cruiser immediately after he had interviewed the parties and cleared the scene. While he indicated during cross-examination that it is possible that he misplaced this business card, I believe it is unlikely. The Constable was the most objective and calm person on the scene and clearly would have recognized the need to identify a witness to the accident as an important detail of his investigation, particularly if Ms. Alexander had made a point of giving this card to him. Ms. Alexander was in shock and by her own admission, not thinking straight.
62  I find that Ms. Alexander's evidence concerning this card is confusing and suspect. I find as a fact that even if Ms. Alexander had received a card from someone at the scene, she did not give it to Constable Grainger.
63  Constable Grainger indicated that if he can form an opinion of fault arising from his investigation at the accident, he would do so. His report indicates that "Alexander failed to yield the right of way to Andrusko in this collision".
The Law
64  The Motor Vehicle Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 318 addresses the rules of the road while making left hand turns:
Yielding right of way on left turn
174 When a vehicle is in an intersection and its driver intends to turn left, the driver must yield the right of way to traffic approaching from the opposite direction that is in the intersection or so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, but having yielded and given a signal as required by sections 171 and 172, the driver may turn the vehicle to the left, and traffic approaching the intersection from the opposite direction must yield the right of way to the vehicle making the left turn.
65  The leading decision on assigning liability arising from a collision where a vehicle is exercising a right of way and the other vehicle does not yield is found in Walker v. Brownlee,  at 461 (S.C.C.). There, Cartwright J. stated:
While the decision of every motor vehicle collision case must depend on its particular facts, I am of opinion that when A, the driver in the servient position, proceeds through an intersection in complete disregard of his statutory duty to yield the right-of-way and a collision results, if he seeks to cast any portion of the blame upon B, the driver having the right-of-way, A must establish that after B became aware, or by the exercise of reasonable care should have become aware, of A's disregard of the law B had in fact a sufficient opportunity to avoid the accident of which a reasonably careful and skilful driver would have availed himself; and I do not think that in such circumstances any doubts should be resolved in favour of A, whose unlawful conduct was fons et origo mali.
66  The test from Walker was followed in Pacheco (Guardian ad litem of) v. Robinson  (C.A.). In that case, a plaintiff cyclist had entered the intersection and then the defendant commenced a left-hand turn with her vehicle. The trial judge found that the defendant had failed to yield the right of way and that the plaintiff cyclist was "obviously and clearly so close so as to constitute an immediate hazard". The Court of Appeal overturned the trial judge's finding that the cyclist was contributorily negligent. The Court, adopting the comments in Walker above, stated:
[10] ...A defendant who wishes to make a left hand turn in an intersection has an obligation to yield to oncoming traffic which is in the intersection under the provision of s. 176 of the Motor Vehicle Act.
[11] The plaintiff was not bound to guard against every conceivable eventuality but only against such eventualities as a reasonable person ought to have foreseen as being within the ordinary range of human experience. The plaintiff was entitled to proceed on the assumption that all other vehicles will do what it is their duty to do, namely observe the rules regulating traffic.
...
[15] In my opinion, a driver who wishes to make a left hand turn at an intersection has an obligation not to proceed unless it can be done safely. Where each party's vision of the other is blocked by traffic, the dominant driver who is proceeding through the intersection is generally entitled to continue and the servient left-turning driver must yield the right of way. The existence of a left-turning vehicle does not raise a presumption that something unexpected might happen and cast a duty on the dominant driver to take extra care. Where the defendant, as here, has totally failed to determine whether a turn can be made safely, the defendant should be held 100 percent at fault for a collision which occurs.
...
[18] In my opinion, when a driver in a servient position disregards his statutory duty to yield the right of way and a collision results, then to fix any blame on the dominant driver, the servient driver must establish that after the dominant driver became aware, or by the exercise of reasonable care should have become aware, of the servient driver's own disregard of the law, the dominant driver had a sufficient opportunity to avoid the accident of which a reasonably careful and skilful driver would have availed himself. In such circumstance any doubt should be resolved in favour of the dominant driver. ...
67  The principles from the above cases were recently affirmed in Nerval v. Kehra, . Harris J.A. found that the analysis begins with determining whether the left-turning driver has satisfied the onus of proving that the oncoming vehicle was not an "immediate hazard":
[33] The principles laid down in Pacheco lead to the conclusion that the starting point of the analysis is that when a left turning driver is assessing making a left turn in an intersection he or she must yield the right of way to oncoming traffic unless it is not an immediate hazard. Describing a driver as dominant means no more than that driver has the right of way, whereas the servient driver has the obligation to yield the right of way. The obligation imposed by s. 174 on the left turning vehicle is that it "must yield the right of way to traffic approaching from the opposite direction that is in the intersection or so close as to constitute an immediate hazard". A left turn must not be commenced unless it is clearly safe to do so. If there are no vehicles in the intersection or sufficiently close to be an imminent hazard, the driver may turn left and approaching traffic must yield the right of way. In other words, if a left turning driver complies with his or her obligation only to start the left turn when no other vehicles are in the intersection or constitute an immediate hazard, then the left turning driver assumes the relationship of being the dominant vehicle and approaching vehicles become servient and must yield the right of way.
[34] As observed in Salaam v. Abramovic,  at para. 33, the words "immediate hazard" are "used to determine when a vehicle may lawfully enter an intersection. They determine who is the dominant driver, but do not, by themselves, define the standard of care in a negligence action."
[35] The effect of s. 174 is to cast the burden of proving the absence of an immediate hazard at the moment the left turn begins onto the left turning driver. This result flows inevitably from the wording of the section itself, given the nature of the absolute obligation the section creates. If a left turning driver, in the face of this statutory obligation, asserts that he or she started to turn left when it was safe to do so, then the burden of proving that fact rests with them.
[Emphasis added.]
68  The evidence clearly indicates that Mr. Andrusko's vehicle was an immediate hazard when Ms. Alexander began her left-hand turn. As the court notes in Nerval at para. 43, this determination is largely a function of speed and distance from the intersection. Mr. Andrusko's evidence was that Ms. Alexander turned unexpectedly in front of him and that she was only a short distance away when she began her turn.
69  Ms. Alexander does not seriously suggest otherwise and concedes, at least in part, that she was to blame for the accident. She did not see Mr. Andrusko's car until she began her turn and it was too late by that time to stop and avoid the collision. On cross-examination, Ms. Alexander said that she was stopped behind the SUV and had room to move around it and attempt the left turn. Only when she was in the intersection making the turn did she first observe Mr. Andrusko. She said, "I was turning and there he was". She acknowledged that if she had seen Mr. Andrusko, she would not have turned at all.
70  I find as a fact that Ms. Alexander did not have a clear view of Mr. Andrusko's oncoming vehicle before she began to make the left-hand turn. I further find that while commencing her turn, Mr. Andrusko's vehicle constituted an "immediate hazard" in that Ms. Alexander could not complete that left-hand turn without risking a collision. As such, Ms. Alexander has not met the onus of showing that it was safe to complete the left-hand turn in these circumstances.
Contributory Negligence
71  Despite conceding some fault for the accident, Ms. Alexander asserts that Mr. Andrusko was also to blame for the collision and was therefore contributorily negligent.
72  As discussed in Nerval, this type of analysis follows after application of the "immediate hazard" test as the second aspect of determining fault for the collision:
[37] The second aspect of the burden relates to proving that despite being the dominant driver, Ms. Khehra nonetheless was negligent and at fault for causing or contributing to the accident. Here, although Ms. Khehra had the right of way, she could exercise that right only in a safe manner. The trial judge correctly relied on the statement of principle from para. 18 of Pacheco, quoted above, in assessing the evidence and reaching his conclusions.
[38] Whether a through driver is dominant turns on whether the driver's vehicle is an immediate hazard at the material time, not why it is an immediate hazard. Dominance identifies who must yield the right of way. One consequence of this analysis is that negligence on the part of a through driver does not disqualify that driver as the dominant driver. The through driver remains dominant, even though their conduct may be negligent. Indeed, the through driver's fault may be greater than the servient driver's fault. In other words, a through driver may be an immediate hazard even though that driver is speeding and given her speed would have to take sudden action to avoid the threat of a collision if the left turning driver did not yield the right of way. The correct analysis is to recognize that the through driver is breaching his or her common law and perhaps statutory obligations and to address the issue as one of apportioning fault, not to reclassify the through driver as servient based on the degree to which the through driver is in breach of her obligations. [Emphasis added.]
73  In accordance with s. 4 of the Negligence Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 333, when a plaintiff contributes negligently to causing his or her own injury, the court must determine relative degrees of fault. The correct inquiry is whether the plaintiff failed to take reasonable care for his or her own safety, and whether that failure was one of the causes of the accident: Bradley v. Bath,  at para. 27.
74  Fault or blameworthiness evaluates the parties' conduct in the circumstances, and the extent or degree to which it may be said to depart from the standard of reasonable care: Alberta Wheat Pool v. Northwest Pile,  at paras. 45-46.
75  Ms. Alexander asserts that Mr. Andrusko failed in respect of various statutory duties such that he contributed to the accident.
76  Firstly, it is alleged that Mr. Andrusko breached s. 144 of the Motor Vehicle Act by speeding and driving without due care and attention:
Careless driving prohibited
144 (1) A person must not drive a motor vehicle on a highway
without due care and attention,
without reasonable consideration for other persons using the highway, or
at a speed that is excessive relative to the road, traffic, visibility or weather conditions.
77  Specifically, it is alleged that Mr. Andrusko was going too fast for the winter road conditions he faced. However, I accept the evidence of Mr. Andrusko and find as a fact that he was not speeding. He was starting from a dead stop at the previous intersection. There was also no evidentiary basis upon which to assert that Mr. Andrusko was driving without due care and attention. I find that he was aware that Ms. Alexander's vehicle was in the oncoming lane, but he was surprised when she turned in front of him unexpectedly.
78  It is also alleged that Mr. Andrusko acted negligently in not stopping or slowing at the intersection given that other vehicles and pedestrians were in and around the intersection at the time. Ms. Alexander contends that Mr. Andrusko breached his statutory obligations arising under ss. 159 and 179 of the Motor Vehicle Act:
Passing on left
159 A driver of a vehicle must not drive to the left side of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle unless the driver can do so in safety.
...
Rights of way between vehicle and pedestrian
179 (1) Subject to section 180, the driver of a vehicle must yield the right of way to a pedestrian where traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation when the pedestrian is crossing the highway in a crosswalk and the pedestrian is on the half of the highway on which the vehicle is travelling, or is approaching so closely from the other half of the highway that he or she is in danger.
...
If a vehicle is slowing down or stopped at a crosswalk or at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the highway, the driver of a vehicle approaching from the rear must not overtake and pass the vehicle that is slowing down or stopped.
79  This argument is largely based on Ms. Alexander's evidence, as above, that during her left-hand turn, there were two other vehicles ? the SUV in front of her and a northbound vehicle stopped at the corner. In addition, she says that she saw a pedestrian standing on the corner of the intersection near to the stopped northbound vehicle.
80  Mr. Andrusko had an entirely different recollection as to what was occurring in the intersection. He does not recall seeing any other vehicles, including both the SUV and the vehicle that Ms. Alexander says was stopped at the northbound corner in the right lane. Finally, he does not recall seeing any pedestrian on the corner.
81  Overall, in my view, Mr. Andrusko's evidence on these issues is more consistent with the probabilities affecting this case. Mr. Andrusko gave his evidence in a fair and straightforward manner and I consider that he was a credible witness. He appropriately conceded where his recollection was not clear. Overall, however, his evidence was consistent and clear. Accordingly, I found Mr. Andrusko to be a reliable witness of the events leading up to the accident.
82  In contrast, Ms. Alexander's evidence presented some difficulties relating to both before and after the accident. While I appreciate that she was doing her best to recall accurately, I consider that she failed in many material respects.
83  Ms. Alexander was clearly in some distress after the accident, indicating that she was numb and shaky. She further acknowledged that she was in shock after the accident and not thinking straight. She was very unclear on many details about the accident, including the order in which the events occurred. For example, she stated many times that she "believed" certain events had occurred. When asked about her conversations with the paramedics and police, she said it was "hard to remember".
84  Consistent with my conclusions on the reliability of Mr. Andrusko's evidence, I find that he did not admit to Ms. Alexander that he was speeding. While he says that he may have apologized for the accident in a general sense, I find that he did not acknowledge fault for the accident.
85  Ms. Alexander's story about the pedestrian and the driver of the stopped northbound car is also suspect. In her direct examination, she only said that some woman came up to her and gave her a business card. Only during cross-examination did the further detail emerge that this "witness" was, in fact, the driver of the stopped car. She then described this woman as 45 years old with short sandy hair. Given that Ms. Alexander had little, if any, recollection of speaking to Constable Grainger, however, I consider that her recollection of these further details is not accurate.
86  Given Ms. Alexander's apparent views about who was at fault for the accident at the time, obtaining a contact number for a witness would have been an important matter for her. Despite that, no business card, if one was obtained by her, materialized at the time. Even if there was a business card from a witness, I accept Constable Grainger's evidence that she did not give any business card to him. While one might excuse Ms. Alexander, since she was in shock at the time, she did not produce it even at a later time.
87  Ms. Alexander also suggested in argument that Mr. Andrusko should have stopped for the pedestrian standing on the street corner waiting to cross 100th Street. During her direct testimony, however, this did not emerge as part of her explanation for turning left or even for her thought process in thinking that she could turn safely because Mr. Andrusko would stop for that pedestrian. As stated above, she did not even see Mr. Andrusko until she had commenced her turn.
88  This story about the pedestrian being ready to cross the street only came out in cross-examination and only when Ms. Alexander was asked questions about what she had told her husband in the car on the way home after the accident.
89  These various other factors ? such as the SUV, the stopped northbound vehicle and the pedestrian ? now raised by Ms. Alexander are also noticeably missing from any later reporting on the accident and the cause of the accident by Ms. Alexander.
90  As noted above, Constable Grainger had no note of being told about any of these matters by Ms. Alexander. Further, in the ICBC claim report filed by Ms. Alexander on January 3, 2008, the same day as the accident, the adjuster noted Ms. Alexander's description of the accident. There is no mention of any other cars, including the SUV and the stopped northbound vehicle, or of a pedestrian. Nor is there any recorded note that, as she now claims, she had assumed that Mr. Andrusko would stop to allow the pedestrian to cross the street. Lastly, she did not mention to ICBC the business card of the witness that she says she obtained. While I accept that these ICBC notes are not necessarily accurate in terms of what Ms. Alexander actually reported, Ms. Alexander has little recollection of what she did say. She does acknowledge, however, that she did not relay these further facts to the ICBC adjuster. Her explanation that she was unaware that she had to tell them everything is difficult to understand since she would have known that ICBC would attempt to determine fault for the accident.
91  Lastly, the evidence does not support Ms. Alexander's description of the crosswalk and the pedestrian waiting to cross. There was no evidence at the trial about there being a crosswalk traversing 100th Street at the intersection in question. Further, even accepting that there was a pedestrian on the corner, there is no evidence that this pedestrian was trying to cross 100th Street at a crosswalk or otherwise. Ms. Alexander says that the person was just standing on the corner and had not made any movement to step into the street. This person might have been waiting to cross 102nd Avenue. Or, assuming that the stopped northbound vehicle was there, the pedestrian might have been talking to the driver of that vehicle. Lastly, if this person really was waiting to cross 100th Street, with the inside northbound vehicle already stopped, it is reasonable to assume that this pedestrian would have at least begun to venture into the street. Even on Ms. Alexander's evidence, this person did not do so.
92  I conclude that Ms. Alexander's evidence on these other matters at the intersection is not reliable. I find as a fact that, contrary to Ms. Alexander's evidence, there was no stopped northbound car in the right lane. Nor was there any pedestrian stopped on the corner waiting to cross 100th Street, whether in a crosswalk or otherwise.
93  I accept Ms. Alexander's evidence concerning the SUV proceeding in front of her southbound on 100th Street, but I find that the SUV was not stopped in the intersection. I consider it more likely that, at some point while she was proceeding down 100th Street, the SUV would have impeded her view of the oncoming vehicles, including that of Mr. Andrusko. However, I find that as or just after she was commencing her left turn, the SUV was not blocking her view and she turned or continued to turn anyway. In any event, the presence of the SUV proceeding southbound through the intersection just before Ms. Alexander turned was not a matter that would have put Mr. Andrusko on notice of anything untoward at the intersection that should have caused him to slow down or stop. His continuing through the intersection in these circumstances did not violate any statutory requirement under the Motor Vehicle Act.
94  In light of these findings, Ms. Alexander has failed to satisfy the onus upon her to establish contributory negligence on Mr. Andrusko's part, since there is no evidentiary basis for any arguments under ss. 144, 159 and 179 of the Motor Vehicle Act in relation to Mr. Andrusko's actions. In short, he did not act carelessly, there was no vehicle to pass on the left and there was no pedestrian attempting to cross 100th Street, whether in a crosswalk or otherwise. In addition, the SUV did not pose any issue. As such, Mr. Andrusko was entitled to proceed on the assumption that Ms. Alexander would obey the rules of the road: Pacheco at paras. 11, 15; Nerval at para. 29. She did not do so. Accordingly, I find Ms. Alexander solely responsible for the collision.
Causation
95  The plaintiff must establish on a balance of probabilities that the defendant's negligence caused or materially contributed to an injury. The defendant's negligence need not be the sole cause of the injury so long as it is part of the cause beyond the de minimis range. Causation need not be determined by scientific precision: Athey v. Leonati,  at paras. 13-17.
96  The primary test for causation asks: but for the defendant's negligence, would the plaintiff have suffered the injury? The "but for" test recognizes that an award of compensation for negligent conduct should be made only where a substantial connection between the injury and the defendant's conduct is present: Resurfice Corp. v. Hanke,  at paras. 21-23. Causation must be established on a balance of probabilities before damages are assessed. As McLachlin C.J.C. stated in Blackwater v. Plint,  at para. 78:
[78] It is important to distinguish between causation as the source of the loss and the rules of damage assessment in tort. The rules of causation consider generally whether "but for" the defendant's acts, the plaintiff's damages would have been incurred on a balance of probabilities. Even though there may be several tortious and non-tortious causes of injury, so long as the defendant's act is a cause of the plaintiff's damage, the defendant is fully liable for that damage. The rules of damages then consider what the original position of the plaintiff would have been. The governing principle is that the defendant need not put the plaintiff in a better position than his original position and should not compensate the plaintiff for any damages he would have suffered anyway: Athey. Mr. Barney's submissions that injury from traumas other than the sexual assault should not be excluded amount to the contention that once a tortious act has been found to be a material cause of injury, the defendant becomes liable for all damages complained of after, whether or not the defendant was responsible for those damages.
97  Mr. Andrusko called Dr. James Filbey, who was qualified as a medical doctor with a speciality in physical medicine and rehabilitation and electrodiagnostic medicine. His speciality is more commonly referred to as "physiatry". Dr. Filbey examined Mr. Andrusko and prepared a report on March 9, 2011. He also prepared supplemental reports dated May 13 and November 23, 2011.
98  As will be discussed in more detail below, Dr. Filbey concluded that Mr. Andrusko had a pre-existing pars interarticularis defect, which is a situation where a bony ring in the vertebrae fails to turn into bone and remains a fibrous tissue. This was asymptomatic before the accident. Dr. Filbey concluded that Mr. Andrusko suffered soft tissue injuries which resulted in neck, shoulder and low back pain and that the low back injuries caused the pars defect to become symptomatic and contribute to the pain. Dr. Filbey concluded that it was his opinion that "Mr. Andrusko's current and ongoing symptoms are a direct result of the MVA".
99  At the request of the defence, Mr. Andrusko was seen by Dr. Paul Bishop for an independent medical examination in November 2011. Dr. Bishop is a medical doctor. Although he does not have any recognized speciality from the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons, as Dr. Filbey has in physiatry, Dr. Bishop has extensive experience in his clinical practice relating to the spine and is involved in teaching and research relating to the spine. He was qualified at the trial as having an expertise in non-operative pathology and diseases of the spine. He provided his report dated November 8, 2011 and supplemental report dated May 23, 2012.
100  Dr. Bishop similarly diagnosed Mr. Andrusko as having mechanical lower back and neck pain. On cross-examination, he acknowledged that these injuries were caused by the accident.
101  On the basis of the medical opinions above, which I accept, particularly that of Dr. Filbey, I conclude that Mr. Andrusko has established on a balance of probabilities that his injuries, as will be described below, were caused by the accident.
Damages
102  Mr. Andrusko's position at trial was that he sustained injuries to his neck, shoulder and low back, and that he has continuous numbness radiating in his left leg. He said that the neck and left shoulder pain improved over the first year or so, but that this pain is now intermittent and occurs about twice per week. Mr. Andrusko's major complaint is that since the accident, he has suffered a continuous low back injury, which is now chronic. This low back injury is to be considered in conjunction with the previously asymptomatic pars interarticularis defect at L5 (which is also called spondylolysis).
103  Ms. Alexander's position is that the neck and shoulder injuries were resolved in one year. Further, Ms. Alexander takes the position that Mr. Andrusko's low back pain arose from mild to moderate soft tissue injuries that were resolved by late 2011.
Summary of Lay Witness Evidence
104  The medical clinical records confirm complaints of pain and numbness in the left leg arising immediately following the accident and complaints of ongoing pain in the lower back continuing to at least October 2009, over a year and a half after the accident:
January 4, 2008 - Dr. Brussow ... has muscle pains - Meds given; O/e stiff neck ... muscular.
...
January 17, 2008 - Dr. Brussow - Pt was in MVC and has back pain .. lumber [sic ] area and sciatica into his [left] leg ... Meds did help but he went to chiropractor and that helped somewhat. ...
...
March 26, 2008 - Dr. Van Zyl - still with some pain in neck and lower back after recent accident ... O: ... some tenderness over trapezius; A: myalgia (post traumatic); P: ... meds
April 23, 2008 - Dr. Van Zyl - still seeing chiropractor, reports pain in lower back, seems like the muscle relaxants worked for the neck spasms at least; O: multiple triggerpoints in lower back; A: post traumatic backpain; P: reassured. advice given on stretches, sleep habits etc.
June 12, 2008 - Dr. Van Zyl - still co lower back pain, says that chiropractor visits not helping, is there an alternative? suggests massage therapy; A: post MVA, mechanical backpain.
October 20, 2008 - Dr. Van Zyl - still with pain after accident requests nalgesia; succeeded in all conservative measures; A: myalgia; P: reassured, see meds.
...
October 19, 2009 - Dr. Van Zyl - doing well, still with ongoing backpain after accident last year. no other problems; A: ongoing mechanical backpain; P: refill of meds
105  Dr. Van Zyl moved back to South Africa about two years ago and did not testify as to his records.
106  I have already indicated that Mr. Andrusko undertook treatments with a chiropractor for about one year after the accident. He then began visits with a physiotherapist in January 2009, a treatment which he found was more helpful. As to the ongoing nature of his symptoms at that time, the physiotherapy records disclose a note on January 30, 2009 that his neck and shoulders were stiff. Mr. Andrusko says that this is consistent with the neck and shoulder pain which was continuing, albeit on an intermittent basis, at that time.
107  During cross-examination, Mr. Andrusko did say that by April 2008, his neck, shoulder and back were not affecting him as much. Mr. Andrusko also agreed during cross-examination that by January 2010, he was only experiencing lower back problems, although he contended that there continued to be intermittent neck and shoulder problems.
108  Mr. Andrusko gave evidence as to the history of his medical complaints arising from the accident in a straightforward manner. I have related some of that history above. Importantly, however, he relates that his improvement has plateaued. He says that at this time, his low back pain and leg numbness remain a fairly constant companion and the neck and shoulder pain arise intermittently. Further, at times, his low back pain is severe depending on his activities at work. He has attempted to address his pain and numbness through exercise and, most recently, physiotherapy.
109  His complaints are corroborated by the evidence of his fiancé, Ms. Stroud. Moreover, somewhat more independent evidence was given by Mr. Higgins, his friend and former co-worker at DGS, concerning ongoing back pain. Mr. Higgins was aware of Mr. Andrusko's low back problems. At times, Mr. Andrusko would mention having problems and that he was taking a break. Mr. Higgins also confirmed that Mr. Andrusko had complaints only a month before Mr. Higgins gave testimony. Mr. Higgins did not consider that Mr. Andrusko was a "complainer". Finally, the most independent evidence came from Mr. Stanway, his boss at Joy Propane, who also confirmed that Mr. Andrusko was put on lighter duties after the accident. While Mr. Andrusko did not call his current supervisor to give evidence at trial, this is understandable since he does not want to advertise his low back difficulties to his current employer.
110  The defence's submissions as to the extent of Mr. Andrusko's injuries are principally directed toward the limited health care that Mr. Andrusko obtained after the accident and the fact that he continued to work the same type of job after the accident.
111  The defence points to the fact that he did not obtain medical treatment at the scene, but that can be balanced against the fact that he sought medical treatment the day after the accident. The defence also points to the 15 chiropractic treatments in 2008, followed by the 11 physiotherapy sessions in 2009. It is true that treatments continued to taper off after that time, with 10 physiotherapy sessions from the beginning of 2010 until November 2012. However, Mr. Andrusko provided evidence that he had difficulty taking time off while working at DGS beginning in early 2010. That would explain the fewer attendances. In addition, during the off-season from working at DGS, there would obviously be less physical strain on his body that would typically give rise to the need for such treatments. Consistent with the DGS working season, he had two attendances at the Fort St. John Medical Clinic relating to the accident injuries in each of 2010 and 2011, early and late in the calendar year. His only attendance in 2012 was also in May.
112  The fact that he takes little medication also does not indicate a lack of ongoing injury. He takes medication only occasionally because he is concerned about being less than alert at work.
113  The defence also suggests that the medical records do not support Mr. Andrusko's ongoing complaints of pain. Yet a review of the records shows ongoing complaints of back pain into 2012. This is less so in relation to the intermittent neck and shoulder pain. This argument raises the same issues as were addressed in Edmondson v. Payer,  at paras. 30-39, aff'd with caveat  at paras. 29-30, concerning whether medical records really do constitute a true record of what a patient might be experiencing ? or not experiencing ? at the time. Mr. Andrusko specifically stated that while the records may indicate only back pain, he did not tell the doctor about all of his complaints of pain at every visit. Rather, he likely mentioned only what was bothering him the most. In that regard, the back pain was always his major complaint. I accept his evidence of the extent of his injuries, as I consider Mr. Andrusko to be a stoic individual. As confirmed by Ms. Stroud and Mr. Higgins, he is not, to put it less elegantly, a complainer. He candidly said that he just pushed through the pain for the most part.
114  Mr. Andrusko also has a particularly brusque manner of speaking. In my view, this negatively affects how he relates his symptoms. This may have contributed to what Mr. Andrusko communicated, or did not communicate, to his health care providers. Accordingly, I do not accept that these clinical records confirm that the soft tissue injuries relating to his neck and shoulder were resolved quickly over some four months, as contended by Ms. Alexander. Nor do I consider that they support the argument that his low back pain and numbness has resolved.
115  Finally, the defence argues that Mr. Andrusko's work record indicates that he has recovered. It points to the fact that Mr. Andrusko finally returned to normal duties at Joy Propane and later obtained very physical jobs at H2Oasis and DGS.
116  Mr. Andrusko is a poor communicator. I have taken that into account in considering his evidence. Whether that comes from his limited education is unclear and likely irrelevant. Derek Nordin, the vocational evaluator who gave evidence at trial, stated that, in his view, Mr. Andrusko was a poor historian and had difficulty relating his history to him. Like Mr. Nordin, however, I consider that he was doing his best in terms of giving an honest account of his injuries since the accident. Again, Mr. Andrusko is a stoic person. He continued working with pain because he simply had no choice. That he continued working does not mean that he was free of pain in doing so.
Expert Testimony
117  Dr. Filbey's report of March 9, 2011 outlined Mr. Andrusko's complaints as outlined above, namely that his neck pain is intermittent and that when he does get a stiff neck it is a sharp and instantaneous pain when he turns right or left. His report records that this occurs once or twice every few months. There was also a report of shoulder pain which was said to happen more frequently than the neck pain and which results in a dull burning pain. This was located in the trapezius and back shoulder region. Mr. Andrusko reported that this was occurring once per week and would occur with long stationary postures. With respect to the low back, Mr. Andrusko reported that this dull pain is present all the time and that he also gets sharp pains that he describes as "unbearable". These sharp pains are followed by numbness in his left leg.
118  As stated above, Dr. Filbey gave his opinion that Mr. Andrusko has low back pain and cervicothoracic pain and that he unfortunately is in the small category of people who have chronic pain.
119  The defence raised the argument that Dr. Filbey's reports were inconsistent with respect to the pars defect that was found on the right side. In his first report, he indicated that the pain was bilateral, meaning that it is on both sides. In his later report, he indicated that the pain was localized to the right side as a result of biomechanical alterations arising from the pars defect. Ms. Alexander argues that Dr. Filbey was backtracking in terms of his explanation for the pain. I do not agree. I take from Dr. Filbey's report that the pain was found in a general area. The fact that it was found more on the right does not change the overall finding. I note that Dr. Bishop found discomfort on the left side. It seems clear that locating and noting pain is not an exact science.
120  The contrary opinion of Dr. Bishop principally centered on his proposition that he could detect no objective findings of abnormality that would explain the ongoing symptoms alleged by Mr. Andrusko. Nor did he find any evidence that the pars defect was playing any role in Mr. Andrusko's low back pain. On that basis, he concluded that it would be reasonable for Mr. Andrusko to suffer an acute phase after the accident of 12 to 16 weeks. Dr. Bishop acknowledged that during this period of recovery Mr. Andrusko was likely to experience an increase in the intensity of his pain symptoms, but that was normal. After that time, he was unable to relate any of Mr. Andrusko's ongoing spine-related symptoms directly to the trauma arising from the accident. At the time of his report in November 2011, Dr. Bishop considered that Mr. Andrusko's prognosis for a full recovery to his pre-accident level was "good".
121  Nevertheless, on cross-examination, Dr. Bishop agreed that pain is often unable to be related to any other objective criteria. He agreed that many patients have pain and doctors cannot determine what is wrong with them. He agreed that pain can be very disabling. In his practice, if the disability, as self-reported by the patient, exceeds the impairment and is ruled out on a purely objective basis, he would normally look for other factors that might be contributing to the ongoing pain. He indicated that Mr. Andrusko had one of these, but he did not identify that risk factor. In any event, he indicated that further testing should be done on Mr. Andrusko to determine whether there is anything else contributing to the matter.
122  Dr. Bishop confirmed that in a small proportion of people who experience pain, 5% of them will continue to suffer with chronic pain. In that situation, the medical profession typically turns to consider pain management techniques.
123  There is obviously a need in this case to carefully consider Mr. Andrusko's subjective evidence as to the extent of his injuries. That and the conflict in the medical evidence concerning objective evidence of impairment invites a consideration of the oft-quoted comments of the court regarding subjective reports of pain. The correct and cautious approach to assessing injuries which depend on subjective reports of pain was discussed in Price v. Kostryba  at 399 (S.C.) by McEachern C.J. In referring to an earlier decision, he said:
In Butler v. Blaylock, , decided 7th October 1981, Vancouver No. B781505 (unreported), I referred to counsel's argument that a defendant is often at the mercy of a plaintiff in actions for damages for personal injuries because complaints of pain cannot easily be disproved. I then said:
I am not stating any new principle when I say that the court should be exceedingly careful when there is little or no objective evidence of continuing injury and when complaints of pain persist for long periods extending beyond the normal or usual recovery.
An injured person is entitled to be fully and properly compensated for any injury or disability caused by a wrongdoer. But no one can expect his fellow citizen or citizens to compensate him in the absence of convincing evidence - which could be just his own evidence if the surrounding circumstances are consistent - that his complaints of pain are true reflections of a continuing injury.
Summary of the Injuries Caused by the Accident
124  As I have indicated above, I consider Mr. Andrusko to have been a credible witness. I found that he attempted to give his evidence in terms of his injuries in an honest and forthright manner. As stated above, Mr. Andrusko is not a very good communicator and I have taken that into account in considering his evidence. I also consider that he is a stoic individual who does not want others to think of him as a "complainer".
125  The extent of his injuries was confirmed by the evidence of Ms. Stroud, who I also found to be a credible witness.
126  Moreover, Mr. Andrusko's evidence is supported by the clinical records of the Fort St. John Medical Clinic. While I appreciate that the clinical notes do not record every single complaint made by Mr. Andrusko on a particular day, they generally reflect his ongoing complaints and the treatment of those complaints over the period of time of those records. The physiotherapy and chiropractic reports also provide independent confirmation of Mr. Andrusko's complaints over this period of time.
127  The independent evidence of Mr. Stanway and Mr. Higgins further confirms Mr. Andrusko's complaints about his low back, shoulder and neck pain in the workplace.
128  Finally, I have considered Dr. Bishop's concerns about the lack of objective evidence of Mr. Andrusko's pain. For the most part, Dr. Bishop's rejection of physical examination techniques was based on research examining the reliability of various procedures to determine tenderness, such as palpation. In light of this, I have approached that matter with some caution.
129  I am particularly persuaded by Dr. Filbey's evidence concerning the difficulty that he himself acknowledged was present when confirming pain in similar situations. Dr. Filbey said that with respect to musculoskeletal injuries such as that suffered by Mr. Andrusko, the fact that a diagnosis is largely based on a patient's subjective complaints of pain is hardly unusual. Nevertheless, Dr. Filbey indicated that he takes steps to test the complaints of pain in an organized fashion that allows him to form some view as to whether the subjective complaints are justified. In this case, he expressed no hesitation in confirming his opinion that Mr. Andrusko's complaints are real. In addition, Dr. Filbey indicated that he relied not only on Mr. Andrusko's complaints of pain but also on his own physical examination and review of all of the relevant records and medical tests.
130  Overall, I consider Dr. Filbey's reports to be a more comprehensive consideration of the circumstances relating to Mr. Andrusko. To a large extent, Dr. Bishop seems to have relied upon various research results which addressed certain issues within a large population base. As Dr. Filbey said, research is fine, but it must be balanced against the actual individual that is before you with a particular problem. In addition, I consider that Dr. Filbey was better qualified from a medical perspective to opine on Mr. Andrusko's issues in this particular situation. Overall, I found Dr. Filbey's reports to be consistent in terms of his findings of pain. Accordingly, where there is a difference of opinion as between the two doctors, I prefer and accept the evidence and opinion of Dr. Filbey.
131  On the basis of the lay witness evidence and the expert evidence of Dr. Filbey, I find the following facts in relation to the determination of Mr. Andrusko's injuries:
Mr. Andrusko suffered injuries to his neck and shoulder, which were largely resolved within one year. Pain from those areas continues to flare up from time to time, about once per week, at which time the pain is severe; and
Mr. Andrusko suffered injuries to his low back such that he has constant pain in that area, which is at times severe. In conjunction with this low back pain, Mr. Andrusko suffers from persistent numbness in his left leg on a regular basis.
132  I also find that further improvement of these injuries is unlikely. To use the medical term, Mr. Andrusko's condition is now "chronic".
Quantum of Damages
Non-Pecuniary Damages
133  Non-pecuniary damages are awarded to compensate the plaintiff for pain, suffering, loss of enjoyment of life, and loss of amenities. The compensation awarded should be fair to all parties. Fairness is measured against awards made in comparable cases. However, such cases, though helpful, serve only as a rough guide. Each case depends on its own unique facts: Trites v. Penner,  at paras. 188-189.
134  In Stapley v. Hejslet, , the Court of Appeal outlined the factors to be considered when assessing non-pecuniary damages:
[46] The inexhaustive list of common factors cited in Boyd [v. Harris, ] that influence an award of non-pecuniary damages includes:
age of the plaintiff;
nature of the injury;
severity and duration of pain;
disability;
emotional suffering; and
loss or impairment of life;
I would add the following factors, although they may arguably be subsumed in the above list:
impairment of family, marital and social relationships;
impairment of physical and mental abilities;
loss of lifestyle; and
the plaintiff's stoicism (as a factor that should not, generally speaking, penalize the plaintiff: Giang v. Clayton,  (QL), ).
135  The assessment of non-pecuniary damages is necessarily influenced by the individual plaintiff's personal experiences in dealing with his injuries and their consequences, and the plaintiff's ability to articulate that experience: Dilello v. Montgomery,  at para. 25.
136  Mr. Andrusko cites Pett v. Pett,  and Miller v. Lawlor,  in support of an award of <damage type = "other">$85,000</damage>. In Pett, a young man who was a construction worker was injured and had suffered neck and shoulder injuries which resolved fairly quickly. His chronic lower back pain persisted and affected both his work and recreational activities. Non-pecuniary damages in the amount of <damage type = "other">$85,000</damage> were awarded. In Miller, a young man suffered injuries giving rise to chronic pain, which affected his physical work and recreational activities. The award was <damage type = "other">$65,000</damage>.
137  Counsel for Ms. Alexander agreed that if I rejected her submissions on the extent of Mr. Andrusko's injuries, which I have, the range suggested by Mr. Andrusko for non-pecuniary damages was appropriate.
138  I consider that the circumstances in Pett are the closest to those of Mr. Andrusko. Both cases involve young men who are involved in very physical jobs. Both are considered stoic in that they work through the pain. Like Mr. Pett, some of Mr. Andrusko's injuries have abated, but they remain intermittent to this time. They also generally return when Mr. Andrusko's job activities exacerbate that pain, something that happens fairly frequently. The low back pain and leg numbness is persistent and will be a condition that Mr. Andrusko lives with for the rest of his life.
139  While most of the impact of Mr. Andrusko's injuries is being experienced in his working life, it has also impacted his personal life, particularly his relationship with Ms. Stroud. Also, his ability to work at his DJ business has been affected in the sense that it is uncomfortable to sit for long periods of time without pain.
140  In addition, Dr. Filbey indicated in his report that Mr. Andrusko could continue to do his housekeeping and yard work on his own, although in less than 20 years he would more than likely require assistance for heavy seasonal tasks. These circumstances are factors that may be considered in the assessment of non-pecuniary damages: McTavish v. MacGillivray,  at para. 73.
141  In Pett, the plaintiff's injuries had a significant impact on his recreational activities. I do not consider that Mr. Andrusko's non-work activities have been as negatively affected.
142  Taking all the circumstances into account, I award the sum of <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$80,000</damage>.
Loss of Future Earning Capacity
143  One of the most controversial issues at the trial concerned Mr. Andrusko's prognosis and ability to earn income in the future.
144  A claim for loss of future earning capacity raises two key questions: 1) has the plaintiff's earning capacity been impaired by his or her injuries; and 2) if so, what compensation should be awarded for the resulting financial harm that will accrue over time? The appropriate means of assessment will vary from case to case: Brown v. Golaiy  (S.C.); Pallos v. Insurance Corporation of British Columbia  (C.A.); Pett.
145  Insofar as it is possible, the plaintiff should be put in the position he or she would have been in but for the injuries caused by the defendant's negligence: Lines v. W & D Logging Co. Ltd.,  at para. 185. The essential task of the court is to compare the likely future of the plaintiff's working life if the accident had not happened with the plaintiff's likely future working life after the accident: Gregory v. Insurance Corporation of British Columbia,  at para. 32.
146  The plaintiff must always prove that there is a real and substantial possibility of a future event leading to an income loss: Perren v. Lalari,  at para. 32. If that burden is met, then there are two possible approaches to assessing the loss of future earning capacity: the "earnings approach" from Pallos; and the "capital asset approach" in Brown. Both approaches are correct and will be more or less appropriate depending on whether the loss in question can be quantified in a measureable way: Perren at para. 32.
147  The earnings approach involves a form of math-oriented methodology such as (i) postulating a minimum annual income loss for the plaintiff's remaining years of work, multiplying the annual projected loss by the number of remaining years and calculating a present value, or (ii) awarding the plaintiff's entire annual income for a year or two: Pallos; Gilbert v. Bottle,  at para. 233.
148  The capital asset approach involves considering factors such as whether the plaintiff: (i) has been rendered less capable overall of earning income from all types of employment; (ii) is less marketable or attractive as a potential employee; (iii) has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities that might otherwise have been open; and (iv) is less valuable to herself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market: Brown; Gilbert at para. 233.
149  The principles that apply in assessing loss of future earning capacity were summarized by Low J.A. in Reilly v. Lynn,  at para. 101:
[101] The relevant principles may be briefly summarized. The standard of proof in relation to future events is simple probability, not the balance of probabilities, and hypothetical events are to be given weight according to their relative likelihood: Athey v. Leonati,  at para. 27. A plaintiff is entitled to compensation for real and substantial possibilities of loss, which are to be quantified by estimating the chance of the loss occurring: Athey v. Leonati, supra, at para. 27, Steenblok v. Funk  at 135 (C.A.). The valuation of the loss of earning capacity may involve a comparison of what the plaintiff would probably have earned but for the accident with what he will probably earn in his injured condition: Milina v. Bartsch  at 93 (S.C.). However, that is not the end of the inquiry; the overall fairness and reasonableness of the award must be considered: Rosvold v. Dunlop,  at para. 11; Ryder v. Paquette,  (C.A.) (Q.L.). Moreover, the task of the Court is to assess the losses, not to calculate them mathematically: Mulholland (Guardian ad litem of) v. Riley Estate  (C.A.). Finally, since the course of future events is unknown, allowance must be made for the contingency that the assumptions upon which the award is based may prove to be wrong: Milina v. Bartsch, supra, at 79. ...
150  Dr. Filbey, consistent with the evidence of both Mr. Andrusko and Ms. Stroud, found that it was more likely than not that he had reached a point of maximum medical improvement. He concluded that Mr. Andrusko was more likely than not to remain symptomatic at his current level, assuming that he continues to exercise and obtains therapy as needed. Dr. Filbey concluded that the pars defect was associated with biomechanical alterations in his back area following the symptom development, which predisposed Mr. Andrusko to be more recalcitrant to treatment and recovery in the low back. Dr. Filbey stated that there was a "real" possibility that Mr. Andrusko would have increased lower back symptoms in the future:
It is possible that 10-15 years down the road he will have some increased low back pain related to the symptomatic pars defect. Such aggravation would likely increase his symptoms burden in the lumbar spine. The cervicothoracic and costovertebral symptoms are likely to remain stable without significant change based upon the current pattern.
151  Dr. Filbey also addressed Mr. Andrusko's prognosis given his chosen line of work in manual labor:
Occupationally, Mr. Andrusko is a manual worker. He has limited educational background to grade 10 and does not plan on further formal education. He enjoys manual labour and is able to tolerate such work but it is evident from his reports that he has symptom aggravation with such tasks. It is reasonable to assume that he will be able to continue with such employment as tolerated but his durability over the long-term with such works may be less. It is my opinion that over by 10-15 years from now, his low back symptoms are likely to be increased with manual labour and will limit his employment opportunity and durability.
He would be best suited for work that sedentary or light. Moderate tasks may be tolerable to him so long as he can vary his tasks and activities during the day. Heavy regular labour is not recommended for him based upon his symptom profile. If Mr. Andrusko avoids symptom aggravation with manual work at this time, his prognosis in the future may be improved from a symptomatic perspective.
152  As stated above, Mr. Andrusko called Mr. Nordin of The Vocational Consulting Group. He was qualified as an expert vocational assessor and counsellor. Mr. Nordin prepared a report dated January 19, 2012 and a supplemental report dated August 20, 2012. Mr. Andrusko was interviewed in Vancouver on November 9, 2011 and given a variety of aptitude and other tests. Mr. Nordin relies on the results of the testing, certain self-reporting by Mr. Andrusko of his symptoms, and the reports of Dr. Filbey.
153  Of particular importance to Mr. Nordin was Dr. Filbey's diagnosis of neck, shoulder and low back pain and that his low back symptoms would, within 10 to 15 years, likely increase with manual labour, limiting his employment opportunity and durability. Mr. Nordin was asked to assume that Mr. Andrusko would work at his job for the next 15 to 20 years and then stop, and to provide his opinion of what would be the consequences to Mr. Andrusko vocationally. In addition, Mr. Nordin was asked to comment on options available to Mr. Andrusko if he followed Dr. Filbey's advice to change his occupation to one that requires lighter strength.
154  The results of the testing indicated that Mr. Andrusko scored well below average in reading, spelling and math. In fact, in most of those subjects, he was even well below the grade 10 level that he had achieved in high school. Mr. Nordin concluded that Mr. Andrusko was not a strong candidate for further schooling. He further concluded that Mr. Andrusko should stay employed as at present and that his prospects were not good if his low back pain prevented him from continuing in the future. Essentially, Mr. Andrusko would be limited to lighter strength work and a corresponding loss of income:
In my opinion, Mr. Andrusko is not likely going to be able to complete any program of a post-secondary academic nature, including most high end trades training (i.e. plumbing, electrical, mechanical, etc.).
I believe Mr. Andrusko is an individual who does have some potential to acquire skills but this will be through on the job training/experience (much as he has done to date).
...
In my opinion, he is an unsuitable candidate for retraining based on his current education level, his unsuccessful attempts to complete further grade levels, his poor grades, his expressed disinterest in returning to school, his academic achievement as measured by [the testing], as well as his weak scores on most subscales of the GATB aptitude assessment, particularly General Learning Ability.
...
From these work experiences, he has demonstrated potential to acquire skills through on the job training/experience. Since he is likely not able to complete any program of a post-secondary academic nature, including most high end trades training, he is essentially relegated to unskilled or semi-skilled work.
Occupations suitable for Mr. Andrusko, therefore, would include other entry level occupations dependent on what he can physically manage.
...
If in the future he is unable to engage in work of heavy or medium strength nature, then he will most likely be left with lighter strength occupations and potentially lower residual earning capacity.
At the present time, his best vocational option is to stay where he is currently working.
155  In Mr. Nordin's supplemental report, he was asked to comment on the suitability of certain occupations for Mr. Andrusko given his limitations. He considered examples such as truck drivers and landscape and grounds maintenance workers, all considered to be medium strength jobs. Assuming that his low back pain conditions continued into the future, Mr. Nordin was of the view that Mr. Andrusko was not suited for work as a long-distance truck driver. He could possibly be considered for local truck driving positions, where he would have the opportunity of getting out of the truck during the course of a workday. It was Mr. Nordin's experience, however, that individuals who have low back pain are generally ill-suited for any kind of truck driving position, given that truck drivers are often required to do manual work, such as chaining tires. Mr. Nordin was also of the view that Mr. Andrusko was not suitable for work as a landscape and grounds maintenance worker given the significant amount of bending and lifting involved in those activities.
156  Mr. Nordin was also asked what options Mr. Andrusko would be left with if he was no longer able to continue working at DGS or if he lost his job. Mr. Nordin considered that working as a fry cook may be possible, although some bending and lifting would be involved in that that job.
157  Finally, Mr. Nordin was asked whether Mr. Andrusko would be at a disadvantage competing for work with others who did not have low back pain or that type of limitation. Mr. Nordin stated categorically that Mr. Andrusko likely would be at a disadvantage. Specifically, Mr. Nordin stated that "Mr. Andrusko has very limited education and his primary asset was his ability to engage in physical demanding work". Mr. Nordin also examined the types of employment that are generally available in the Fort St. John area. With the exception of retail and hospitality (where he might work as a cashier at substantially lower pay), the remaining sectors of oil and gas, services, forestry, construction and agriculture all tend to be physically demanding. Consequently, Mr. Nordin concluded:
...if he is not able to engage in technical or trade work and/or heavy labouring work, the remaining opportunities for him are significantly reduced (particularly in light of his limited education).
...if Mr. Andrusko is not able to continue in labouring work, his residual vocational options are going to be quite limited (as will be his residual earning potential).
158  Mr. Stanway, his boss at Joy Propane, is now employed at CalGas in Fort St. John, which is involved in the bulk delivery of propane. As at Joy Propane, Mr. Stanway is in charge of hiring and firing employees. He gave evidence that if a worker applied for a job and it was disclosed that he or she had a back problem, he probably would not hire that person. His concern would be that bulk truck drivers sometimes have to do heavy physical work, such as putting chains on vehicles. In addition, Mr. Stanway was concerned about possible WorksafeBC claims increasing if claims for further injury were made. Mr. Nordin expressed the same concerns as Mr. Stanway in his supplemental report about Mr. Andrusko having to reveal his ongoing symptoms, either to his current or any future employer.
159  Ms. Alexander advanced a number of challenges to the conclusions reached in Mr. Nordin's report. Ms. Alexander contended that Mr. Nordin did not test Mr. Andrusko for tolerance for sitting, reaching and bending. He is said to have just accepted the self-reporting by Mr. Andrusko, who said that he experienced increased pain with prolonged sitting. I accept Mr. Nordin's evidence that it is hard to ask someone to quantify tolerance because it is more a qualitative experience. In any event, I have accepted Mr. Andrusko's evidence on his pain tolerance.
160  Ms. Alexander's principal challenge to Mr. Nordin's report was the suggestion that Mr. Andrusko should go back to school to upgrade his skills and education. However, Mr. Nordin says that this option is not feasible. Mr. Andrusko did not do well at school and is not interested in further schooling. Mr. Nordin considered that any such effort would likely be met with failure. I agree with his assessment. Mr. Andrusko is quite aware that formal education is not his strong suit. He does not have the intellectual capacity or inclination to benefit from further schooling.
161  The difficulty with Ms. Alexander's arguments is that they do not recognize the reality of Mr. Andrusko's life and prospects. He is not intellectually inclined or able to pursue many kinds of jobs. His major asset in terms of making a living is his physical strength and his ability to perform manual types of jobs. To that extent, having a healthy neck, shoulders and lower back quite simply becomes a critical requirement in performing those jobs. Mr. Andrusko is quite aware of his limitations in that respect and has quite properly concentrated his efforts on securing manual labour jobs. Perhaps he may have the opportunity at DGS to move to a foreman position, but paperwork is required and he has trouble reading and writing. In addition, a foreman has to deal with customers and, as stated above, Mr. Andrusko is not very well suited to address that aspect of the job given his personality.
162  This not a situation where, for example, a highly educated surgeon injures his hands and has the opportunity to be retrained in another line of medical work. Mr. Andrusko has no other skills upon which to draw. His options are limited. Here, the accident has damaged his major asset: his ability to perform very physical work.
163  The classic statement is that a defendant takes her victim as she finds him. In Pett, the court rejected the trial judge's comments that a negative contingency arose from the limited education of the plaintiff:
[16] I am not sure that I would have considered the education level of the appellant to be what the trial judge described as a negative contingency. In my view, this was simply a factual circumstance concerning this particular plaintiff that engages the principle that a tortfeasor must take the victim as he or she is. I would prefer to characterize this as a negative circumstance concerning this appellant because his modest educational level circumscribes the range of possible avenues of employment open to him. He, like several others of the family connection, had made a decision to not pursue higher education because of a history of available employment in occupational activity with a heavy physical component. That choice may not have been an unreasonable one when made, but, in the altered circumstances now facing this appellant, he is perhaps more affected than would be the case of someone who possesses enhanced educational credentials. I do not concur with the language of the judge in para. 77 when he speaks about the "education level for which the defendant is not responsible". While, of course, the defendant has nothing to do with the earlier choice the appellant made about his education, the defendant is responsible for the impact the accident has had, and will have, on this young appellant of limited educational attainment. He must take the appellant as he finds him. In my respectful view, the judge's treatment of this issue is problematic for the reasons I have discussed. [Emphasis added.]
164  The other limitation faced by Mr. Andrusko is that given his temperament, he neither likes to deal with nor is he good in dealing with the public. He does not have a personality that is conducive to dealing with the public. Again, this is a reality that he must face in terms of considering his options going forward. It is also a circumstance that must be factored into an assessment of how his employment options have been narrowed.
165  In short, Mr. Andrusko is extremely limited in his career options going forward. He has a very limited education. His reading and writing skills are minimal at best. He must rely on his physical strength and prowess to make a living. To the extent that his physical abilities have been compromised, however, there remains an issue as to whether he will be able to work at these labour-intensive jobs into the future. Dr. Filbey is of the opinion that Mr. Andrusko's lower back symptoms will likely increase in 10 to 15 years. If that occurs, Mr. Andrusko's ability to continue in this type of intensely physical job will be put in doubt. Further, given his limited education, it is not a realistic option for Mr. Andrusko to be retrained in another type of occupation that would be less physically demanding and would provide the same level of income he currently enjoys. His personality also limits the certain types of jobs he may seek. In the Fort St. John area, where he lives, most jobs at the higher income scales involve some physicality.
166  Ms. Alexander says that Dr. Filbey's conclusions are only speculation and that there is only a mere possibility, not a substantial possibility, that Mr. Andrusko's injuries will limit his employment opportunities. She points to his continuing employment over the last five years in his physical jobs.
167  In support of her position, she cites Samson v. Aubin,  and Fifi v. Robinson, , although the facts in those cases are distinguishable. In Samson, the plaintiff's injuries were known and accommodated: paras. 57-64. In this case, Mr. Andrusko has not disclosed his injuries, and for good reason. Mr. Stanway's evidence supports the position that disclosure of his injuries may give rise to workplace issues which may negatively affect Mr. Andrusko's employability. Furthermore, in Samson, the medical evidence from the plaintiff's own doctor did not support his argument: para. 61. This is in contrast to support from Dr. Filbey's medical opinion and from Mr. Nordin's report. In Fifi, the court found that improvement of the injuries was likely and that such arguments for this type of award were speculative. The plaintiff's unreliable evidence was not corroborated by her employer, nor was it supported by medical evidence: paras. 132-138.
168  Mr. Andrusko suggests that based on the four factors noted by Finch J. (as he then was) in Brown, he has established a real and substantial possibility of a loss of future earning capacity. I agree. Mr. Andrusko has established a real and substantial possibility of a future event leading to an income loss based on his evidence and the evidence of Mr. Stanway and Mr. Higgins, and based on the reports of Dr. Filbey and Mr. Nordin, all of which I accept.
169  Mr. Andrusko has been rendered less capable of earning income from labour jobs, and his injuries will affect his marketability in terms of continuing at or securing these types of jobs in the future. His injuries will also affect his ability to take advantage of opportunities in the future. Lastly, I consider that Mr. Andrusko is less valuable to himself as a person capable of earning income. He is a young man who has worked from a young age to support himself and who recognizes the need to continue his employment. He must rely on his own resources, such as they are now, to make his way in the world. Those resources include his physical body. This is not the same situation considered in Pett and Miller where the plaintiffs worked in family businesses and could expect some accommodation in the workplace. The medical evidence supports the conclusion that in 10 to 15 years, his symptoms will likely increase to the point of compromising his ability to continue in this type of employment. Mr. Andrusko is concerned about his ability to continue with his only realistic type of employment, particularly where his other options are otherwise limited. These other options also do not provide the same level of income as he currently enjoys.
170  With respect to quantifying damages, given Mr. Andrusko's young age, his present employment, and the uncertainties arising from his future career path, I consider that the capital asset approach is appropriate: Perren; Miller at para. 129.
171  Mr. Andrusko submits that an appropriate award is <damage type = "other">$300,000</damage>, based on the following: he is currently 26 years old, he has limited education, and he has challenges in dealing with the public and in performing many types of jobs in the Fort St. John area. Ms. Alexander did not make any submissions on the assessment of this award in the event that I found in favour of Mr. Andrusko on the threshold question.
172  It must be emphasized again that the determination of the damages for loss of earning capacity is not a mathematical calculation. Rather, it is an assessment or estimate of the loss after considering the evidence: Morris v. Rose Estate  (C.A.) at para. 28; Miller at paras. 132-33. Nevertheless, the courts have consistently used mathematical calculations as "guideposts" to provide some parameters towards arriving at that estimate: Morris at paras. 20-24. With a young person at the start of their working life, the court's task of peering into the future is undeniably made more difficult: Morris at para. 21; Pett at para. 21.
173  In Morris v. Rose Estate,  (S.C.) at paras. 57-64, the trial judge used a mathematical calculation for loss of earning capacity of a young 23-year-old plaintiff, together with an amount for general impairment, to arrive at a figure of <damage type = "other">$140,000</damage>. The Court of Appeal considered this inadequate and increased the total award to <damage type = "other">$250,000</damage>: Morris at para. 27.
174  Mr. Andrusko provided a mathematical calculation for consideration by the court. In 2012, Mr. Andrusko earned <damage type = "other">$52,000</damage> at DGS plus <damage type = "other">$9,600</damage> for employment insurance, for a total of approximately <damage type = "other">$62,000</damage>. Mr. Nordin identified that a lighter type of occupation available to Mr. Andrusko may be working as a cashier, whose average earnings are <damage type = "other">$30,000</damage>. If that comparison was used from age 40, there would be an annual loss of about <damage type = "other">$30,000</damage> over a period of 25 years (assuming a retirement age of 65). After applying a discount rate, the total present value is <damage type = "other">$552,732</damage>. This figure does not include any adjustment for contingencies, both positive and negative. Those unknowns of course include when he may have to cease doing labour jobs, what employment he is able to get in the off-season and at what wage, or what his "replacement" job might be if he quits physical labour jobs and what wage he might earn.
175  In Pett v. Pett, , the trial judge accepted a loss of earning capacity based on the medical evidence that the 23-year-old plaintiff suffered from a disabling back condition that would limit his available employment in the future. He awarded <damage type = "other">$120,000</damage>: para. 79.
176  The Court of Appeal in Pett increased the award to <damage type = "other">$225,000</damage>. The court considered the actuarial evidence and a mathematical calculation similar to the one above. After applying appropriate discounts and general contingencies, it arrived at a "useful starting point for an analysis" of <damage type = "other">$300,000</damage>. The court rejected the substantial discount applied by the trial judge in light of the plaintiff's positive work ethic and the opportunities for employment through the plaintiff's family connections: paras. 23-25. As above, the court also rejected what seemed to be the application of a negative contingency given the lack of education achieved by the plaintiff: paras. 16, 24.
177  Mr. Andrusko also has a positive work ethic, but he unfortunately does not have the added benefit of expecting that his employment will be secured through such family connections.
178  In Miller, the young 24-year-old pipefitter was being accommodated in the employ of his father's business. His injuries prevented him from completing certain jobs, although he pushed through the pain given his strong work ethic, similar to what Mr. Andrusko does at his job. The court noted that using the mathematical or projected earnings approach outlined above may be more appropriate where the plaintiff has evidence of income before the accident as compared to a different job after the accident: para. 126. The court awarded the sum of <damage type = "other">$210,000</damage>, which equated to three years of annual income: paras. 139-140.
179  There was no expert evidence, including actuarial evidence, adduced here, as there was in Pett, about what contingencies might generally be applied to the mathematical calculations set out above. Nevertheless, those general contingencies not specific to the facts of the case resulted in a reduction of 37%. In this case, such a general negative contingency reduces the amount to <damage type = "other">$352,000</damage>. From that starting point, and keeping in mind the conservative approach adopted in Pett at para. 24, further contingencies must be applied. Again, as in Pett, Mr. Andrusko has a good work ethic, which would suggest a lower negative contingency to be applied, but he does not have the same security of employment that arose in that case.
180  As with any situation involving a young plaintiff whose career paths are somewhat uncertain, I must now embark upon gazing into the "crystal ball".
181  I am persuaded that Mr. Andrusko's injuries will likely affect his ability to work and thus will impact his future employment. His employment options have been narrowed in the labour market, and it is a likely possibility that his earnings will be affected in the future. There are positive factors, such as Mr. Andrusko's work ethic, which I believe supports the view that he will continue to work and push through the pain to the extent that he is able. Negative factors arise because of the reality that employers look for healthy employees who can perform the required functions and who will need not resort to insurance claims such as through WorksafeBC. Mr. Andrusko is competing in an increasingly competitive work environment and will be required to compete with healthy men for these jobs.
182  Given all the foregoing, I award the sum of <damage type = "future wage loss">$250,000</damage> under this head of damages.
Costs of Future Care
183  The plaintiff is entitled to compensation for the cost of future care based on what is reasonably necessary to restore him to his pre-accident condition insofar as that is possible. When full restoration cannot be achieved, the court must strive to assure full compensation through the provision of adequate future care. The award is to be based on what is reasonably necessary on the medical evidence to preserve and promote the plaintiff's mental and physical health: Milina v. Bartsch  (S.C.C.); Williams v. Low, ; Spehar et al. v. Beazley et al., .
184  The test for determining the appropriate award under the heading of cost of future care is an objective one based on medical evidence. For an award of future care: (i) there must be a medical justification for claims for cost of future care; and (ii) the claims must be reasonable: Milina at 84.
185  The award of damages is thus a matter of prediction of what will happen in the future. If a plaintiff has not used a particular item or service in the past, it may be inappropriate to include its cost in a future care award: Izony v. Weidlich,  at para. 74.
186  The extent to which a future care costs award should be adjusted for contingencies, if any, depends on the specific care needs of the plaintiff. In some cases, negative contingencies are offset by positive contingencies and a contingency adjustment is not required. In other cases, however, the award is reduced based on the prospect of improvement in the plaintiff's condition or increased based on the prospect that additional care will be required. Each case falls to be determined on its particular facts: Gilbert at para. 253.
187  An assessment of damages for cost of future care is not a precise accounting exercise: Krangle (Guardian ad litem of) v. Brisco,  at para. 21.
188  Dr. Filbey recommended that Mr. Andrusko consider further treatments, being a six-month course with a kinesiologist to develop a core fitness routine and program and up to 12 sessions of physiotherapy in a year for acute or chronic symptom aggravation. He also recommended analgesic and anti-inflammatory medications as needed, although Dr. Filbey thought this would likely gradually increase over time. Since Mr. Andrusko is engaged in his own exercise program now, no award is sought for the expense of a kinesiologist.
189  Mr. Andrusko seeks an award for future physiotherapy sessions, which at 12 sessions have an annual cost of <damage type = "other">$660</damage>. Taking this amount to age 65 and applying a discount factor of 3.5% and a present value factor, the total is $13,927. He seeks $10,000 to account for contingencies. Ms. Alexander says that this amount is excessive since he has only had three or four sessions per year for 2011 and 2012. I would note, however, that the low number of sessions is largely driven by his work schedule at DGS, which does not accommodate time off to obtain treatment. That may change over time if he switches to another job or another type of job in the future.
190  He also seeks an award of <damage type = "other">$2,250</damage> for medications, which reflects the nominal amount presently spent per year (<damage type = "other">$30</damage>) to age <damage type = "other">41</damage> and an estimated doubling of that cost for another 30 years to age 70.
191  Again, Dr. Bishop took a very theoretical approach to the issue as to what benefits Mr. Andrusko might enjoy by further treatments as recommended by Dr. Filbey. He did not state this as an opinion. Rather, he referred to "recently published clinical practice guidelines" that he says recommend against the use of passive based treatments, such as physiotherapy and massage therapy, and the prolonged use of any medications. He indicated that he did not know of any studies that validate the use of chiropractic spinal manipulation therapy. He noted that such therapies may promote the wrong behavior in the sense that the patient becomes erroneously dependent upon these therapies when in fact they are improving regardless of those therapies. Accordingly, he recommends that Mr. Andrusko avoid all of these forms of treatment.
192  Dr. Filbey addressed his recommendation for further physiotherapy treatments in the context of Dr. Bishop's opinion. Dr. Filbey also referred to the research identified by Dr. Bishop and spoke about the limitations of that research in the context of an individual assessment. In his extensive practice, he recommends these types of treatments. If the patient responds, he promotes those treatments. Dr. Filbey's explanation was, in my view, reasonable and informed by much common sense. In addition, Dr. Filbey does not recommend that there be extensive physiotherapy sessions for the rest of Mr. Andrusko's life (which is reasonable given his past need for such therapy). Rather, he is recommending physiotherapy on an intermittent basis if such is needed for the purpose of getting Mr. Andrusko back to his activities.
193  In my view, Dr. Filbey's recommendations regarding continuing physiotherapy reflects a reasonable approach, both in terms of the benefits that Mr. Andrusko has received to date and his likely need for continuing treatment given his condition. However, I consider that 12 sessions per year is excessive, particularly since Mr. Andrusko only works part of the year, when the aggravation of his symptoms would occur.
194  I also agree with the recommendations concerning medication. While Mr. Andrusko's use of pain medication is now somewhat minimal, that is likely to change and increase as he ages. The defence took no issue on the estimated amounts.
195  With the exception of the number of physiotherapy sessions, the calculations provided by Mr. Andrusko, including the appropriate discount and contingency factors and present value calculations, are reasonable. I would reduce the claimed amount for physiotherapy to $7,750. Accordingly, the amount of <damage type = "future care">$10,000</damage> is awarded for future care.
Special Damages
196  It is well established that an injured person is entitled to recover the reasonable out-of-pocket expenses they incurred as a result of an accident. This is grounded in the fundamental governing principle that an injured person is to be restored to the position he or she would have been in had the accident not occurred: X. v. Y.,  at para. 281; Milina at 78.
197  Mr. Andrusko claims various expenses, as follows: chiropractic bills - <damage type = "sub-special">$575</damage>; physiotherapy bills - <damage type = "sub-special">$725</damage>; medication - <damage type = "sub-special">$341.91</damage>; and miscellaneous expenses (back belt, massage therapy and exercise ball) - <damage type = "sub-special">$79.52</damage>.
198  I am satisfied that all of these expenses were incurred as a result of the accident and were reasonably incurred in aid of Mr. Andrusko's attempts to address his injuries. The amount of <damage type = "special">$1,721.43</damage> is awarded.
Summary
199  In summary, damages are awarded as follows:
Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$80,000</damage>;
Diminishment of earning capacity: <damage type = "future wage loss">$250,000</damage>;
Cost of future care: <damage type = "future care">$10,000</damage>;
Special damages: <damage type = "special">$1,721.43</damage>.
Costs
200  Mr. Andrusko is entitled to pre-judgment interest on the special damages awarded. Mr. Andrusko is also entitled to his costs, unless the parties seek to make further submissions in that respect. If further submissions are to be made, they must be filed within 30 days of the delivery of this judgment.
S.C. FITZPATRICK J.
End of Document
Anderson v. Minhas, [2011] B.C.J. No. 259
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
New Westminster, British Columbia
L.W. Bernard J.
Heard: July 26-30, August 4 and 5, 2010.
Judgment: February 18, 2011.
Docket: M118919
Registry: New Westminster
[2011] B.C.J. No. 259   |   2011 BCSC 203   |   2011 CarswellBC 268   |   198 A.C.W.S. (3d) 991
Between Patricia Elizabeth Anderson, also known as Patricia Elizabeth Harris, Plaintiff, and Nardip Minhas, Defendant
(83 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Body injuries — Neck — Whiplash — Fibromyalgia or chronic pain — Considerations impacting on award — Pre-existing injury — Credibility — Action by plaintiff for damages for injuries incurred in motor vehicle accident allowed in part — Plaintiff, age 29, was involved in rear-end collision with defendant — She contended that whiplash injuries evolved into fibromyalgia, resulting in significant disability — Plaintiff failed to prove causal link between accident and fibromyalgia — Plaintiff failed to state extent of pre-accident pain issues to her expert witnesses — Temporal link between collision and onset of fibromyalgia symptoms was inconsistent with causal link — Plaintiff awarded general damages of $6,000 and special damages of $120.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Considerations — Duration of loss — Special damages — Non-pecuniary loss — Action by plaintiff for damages for injuries incurred in motor vehicle accident allowed in part — Plaintiff, age 29, was involved in rear-end collision with defendant — She contended that whiplash injuries evolved into fibromyalgia, resulting in significant disability — Plaintiff failed to prove causal link between accident and fibromyalgia — Plaintiff failed to state extent of pre-accident pain issues to her expert witnesses — Temporal link between collision and onset of fibromyalgia symptoms was inconsistent with causal link — Plaintiff awarded general damages of $6,000 and special damages of $120.
Tort law — Negligence — Causation — Causal connection — Application of principles — Action by plaintiff for damages for injuries incurred in motor vehicle accident allowed in part — Plaintiff, age 29, was involved in rear-end collision with defendant — She contended that whiplash injuries evolved into fibromyalgia, resulting in significant disability — Plaintiff failed to prove causal link between accident and fibromyalgia — Plaintiff failed to state extent of pre-accident pain issues to her expert witnesses — Temporal link between collision and onset of fibromyalgia symptoms was inconsistent with causal link — Plaintiff awarded general damages of $6,000 and special damages of $120.
Action by the plaintiff, Anderson, against the defendant, Minhas, for damages to compensate for injuries suffered in a motor vehicle accident. In April 2007, the defendant's vehicle rear-ended the plaintiff's vehicle. The impact was described as minor. The defendant admitted liability for the collision. Prior to the accident, the plaintiff, age 29, had ongoing episodes of back, neck and chest pain. She worked at a dog grooming business, earning approximately $8,000 per year, and engaged in a variety of recreational activities. The plaintiff testified that the impact caused her chest to strike the steering wheel and her head to strike the headrest. She heard her neck crack and was dazed by the impact. She left work after a few hours to seek medical attention at a clinic and attended her family physician the following day. She attended physiotherapy and took medication, but her condition worsened throughout 2007. She developed lower back pain, leg pain, hand pain, pain and numbness in her face, and blurry vision. In 2008, she developed headaches. However, she did not report her symptoms to her physician until April 2008, because she believed they would resolve with time. The plaintiff was diagnosed with fibromyalgia in January 2009. The plaintiff claimed that her whiplash injuries evolved into fibromyalgia, resulting in a significant physical disability. The defendant submitted that the plaintiff failed to prove a sufficient causal link between the collision and fibromyalgia. Expert witnesses for the parties differed on the extent or existence of the causal link. 

HELD: Action allowed in part.
 The plaintiff established that the collision caused some degree of whiplash injury or re-injury that caused ongoing symptoms for six weeks. Inconsistencies with the plaintiff's evidence regarding her pre-accident health were overcome by consistencies in the medical evidence. The plaintiff established that she had fibromyalgia, but failed to establish that her condition was caused by the collision with the defendant. The plaintiff's expert evidence did not sufficiently address the cause of her condition. To the extent that a causal link was stated in the plaintiff's expert evidence, it was undermined by the plaintiff's failure to accurately report her medical history to the expert. In addition, the plaintiff's development of fibromyalgia was not within six months of the collision as was typically the case where trauma was the suspected cause. The conclusion regarding causation was further buttressed by evidence that the plaintiff's symptoms had resolved within two months and the significant hiatus in her doctor visits during a critical post-collision period. The plaintiff was awarded general damages of <damage type = "general">$6,000</damage> and special damages of <damage type = "special">$120</damage>. Her remaining claims were dismissed.
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: K. Gandham and A.H. Mohamedali.
Counsel for the Defendant: B.D. Home.
Reasons for Judgment
L.W. BERNARD J.
A. Overview
1  On April 24, 2007, the parties were involved in a low-impact motor vehicle collision; the defendant "rear-ended" the plaintiff. He has admitted his liability for this act.
2  The principal issues in dispute relate to the extent of the personal injuries caused by the defendant. The plaintiff claims that she sustained whiplash injuries which evolved into fibromyalgia: the debilitating condition which is the foundation for her significant damages claim. The essence of the defendant's position is that the plaintiff has failed to prove the necessary causal link between the collision and fibromyalgia.
B. Evidentiary Synopsis
The Collision
3  The collision occurred at approximately 8:00 a.m., at the intersection of 88th Avenue and Fraser Highway, in Surrey, B.C. The parties were the sole occupants of their respective vehicles. The plaintiff, Ms Anderson, was turning right onto Fraser Highway from 88th Avenue when her vehicle, a Toyota Forerunner, was struck from behind by the defendant's vehicle, a Honda Civic. Ms Anderson and the defendant, Mr. Minhas, were travelling the same route and, just prior to the collision, Mr. Minhas had stopped behind Ms Anderson, to wait for her to move forward and merge onto Fraser Highway. As Ms Anderson began to merge, Mr. Minhas followed; however, Ms Anderson braked unexpectedly and the Civic's front bumper struck the trailer hitch of the Forerunner.
4  Mr. Minhas estimated that he had moved forward approximately ten feet from a stationary position when his vehicle struck the Forerunner. He described the impact as minor; one which did not cause the Forerunner to be pushed forward.
5  After the collision the parties drove into a nearby parking lot to inspect for damage and to exchange information. It was noted that the impact caused no damage to the Forerunner and that the Civic sustained a small circular indentation to its front bumper, where it came into contact with the protruding metal ball of the trailer hitch. During the information exchange Ms Anderson held her neck but made no verbal complaints. Mr. Minhas sustained no personal injuries. Both parties continued on to their respective workplaces after the short encounter.
6  Ms Anderson testified that, at the time of the collision, she was looking over her shoulder. She said that the impact forced her body forward and back, during which her chest struck the steering wheel and her head struck the headrest "hard". She said that she felt and heard her neck "crack". She said that the force of the impact caused her cigarettes and cell-phone to fly out of the centre console. She said she was immediately rendered "very dazed and confused". When questioned about whether she lost consciousness she said that she could not say with certainty that she did not; however, she recalled driving to the nearby parking lot at the suggestion of Mr. Minhas.
7  Mr. Minhas testified that the plaintiff did not appear dazed or confused during the information exchange.
8  Ms Anderson's husband, Shane Anderson, testified that he spoke to Ms Anderson shortly after the collision. He said that she informed him that she thought she lost consciousness in the collision, and that her neck had cracked.
Collision Aftermath
9  After the collision, Ms Anderson drove to the pet grooming shop where she worked as a casual employee. She carried out her duties in the morning, but she left work mid-afternoon to attend a nearby medical clinic because her neck and upper back were sore and she felt disoriented and shaken. She saw a clinic physician but nothing was prescribed for her. The next day she attended to her family physician, Dr. Dang, and she complained to him of having a sore back and neck. Dr. Dang recommended that Ms Anderson relax for a few days, take physiotherapy, and use muscle-relaxant and anti-inflammatory medications.
10  Ms Anderson followed Dr. Dang's advice but testified that throughout the balance of 2007 and beyond, she "got worse"; developing lower back pain, leg pain, hand pain, foot pain and numbness, pressure and pain on the left side of her face, blurry vision, headaches, and generalized pain throughout her body. She claims that most of these symptoms have not subsided and that she is now significantly physically disabled by the effects of fibromyalgia. More specifically, Ms Anderson said that within two weeks of the collision she was suffering from leg pains; that within a month she was suffering lower back pain; that during and after her physiotherapy treatments she suffered hand pain; that she suffered pain and tingling down her legs and into her feet within two months of the collision; that her health started to go "dramatically downhill" in the fall of 2007; and, that her headaches began approximately one year after the collision. She said that she did not report these pains to her doctor until April 2008 because she thought and understood she would recover merely with the passage of time.
11  Ms Anderson has had little success with various prescribed medicines to treat her symptoms. At present she claims to find some relief from vitamin B12 injections.
Post-collision Health
12  Sanjeev Bodwal is a physiotherapist who saw Ms Anderson on May 7, 2007 (approximately two weeks after the collision). On this date Ms Anderson complained of pain in her neck and mid-back. She reported that she was a self-employed dog-groomer who had worked "on and off since the collision, depending on her pain level". She said that she was also suffering from sleep disturbance, acid reflux, and an ulcer. He said that she described having "a chronic lumbar spine problem since the age of 12 or 13" and chronic pain in her left spine. (Ms Anderson denied that she told Mr. Bodwal that she had a chronic back problem since the age of 13. She said that she was simply relating what "a lady" had said to her when she was 13.)
13  Ms Anderson saw Mr. Bodwal for ten sessions, which ended on June 8, 2007. Ms Anderson progressed through these sessions as follows: on May 7 she reported pain with all neck movements; on May 16 she reported that her neck "felt good"; on May 18 she reported that she had "minimal" pain in her neck, but still suffered with pain in her back; on May 22 Mr. Bodwal noted 90% improvement in the cervical spine and 60% improvement in the thoracic spine; and, on May 24 Ms Anderson had no complaints. On June 8 Mr. Bodwal noted that Ms Anderson's pain was "back to pre-MVA levels" but that she continued to have "chronic spinal problems since childhood". Physiotherapy concluded and Mr. Bodwal recommended core-strength training and exercise.
14  In cross-examination, Mr. Bodwal agreed that while relapse was possible "usually patients stay better once they are better".
15  Norman Dang is Ms Anderson's family physician. He examined Ms Anderson on April 25, 2007, one day after the collision. Ms Anderson complained of neck pain radiating to her mid-back. Dr. Dang diagnosed neck and back strain, prescribed medication and recommended physiotherapy. Dr. Dang saw Ms Anderson, again, on April 30, May 14, July 13 and July 27, 2007. In this period Ms Anderson reported abdominal pain, bilateral leg cramps, and calf pain, but Dr. Dang attributed only her neck and back complaints to the collision. For example, on July 27 he believed her complaints of leg pains and cramps were related to work. He noted: "She indicated that she was working a lot."
16  Dr. Dang next saw Ms Anderson about various physical pains and complaints (other than gastroesophegeal reflux disease, ("GERD")) on April 24, 2008 (one year after the collision). At this visit she reported neck, mid-back, and lower back pain, hand stiffness, weak legs, and a lack of energy. On April 30, 2008, she complained of bilateral dysesthesia ("like being stung by a bee") in her gluteal and anterior-to-posterior legs. A CT scan of her lumbar spine showed a small disc protrusion and minimal disc bulge.
17  By July 9, 2008, Ms Anderson was complaining to Dr. Dang of suffering from hot flashes, neck and upper back pain, right forearm throbbing pain, and low energy. In September 2008 Ms Anderson reported swollen hands, bilateral blurry vision and headaches, difficulty in standing for more than five minutes, increased pain all over her legs, back and arms, and "worsening mental slowness with reduced memory and concentration". In December 2008 Ms Anderson reported left-side facial discomfort and a burning left eye. Ms Anderson was referred to a neurologist, an ophthalmologist, and a rheumatologist.
18  In cross-examination, Dr. Dang said that he was quite certain that Ms Anderson did not, until July 2008, inform him that her head and neck cracked in the collision. This information that caused him to order an MRI, which he did not do until July 2008. Of Ms Anderson's myriad complaints Dr. Dang attributed only her neck and upper back pains to the collision "because they were not there in a persistent way prior to the motor vehicle accident". He added that this diagnosis pertained to a 1.5 month period immediately post-collision; more specifically, he said "I can't, based on the physiotherapist's report, attribute these pains to the motor vehicle accident after that period."
19  Alan Yorke is a rheumatologist who examined Ms Anderson in January 2009. Dr. Yorke was the first to diagnose Ms Anderson with fibromyalgia. On examination he found Ms Anderson to have full and pain-free range of motion in her neck, with some increased pain at the suprascapular area; however, he also found positive pain responses to 12 pressure points - enough to support a fibromyalgia diagnosis. He noted that Ms Anderson's history of "atypical chest pain", GERD, and L4-5 disc protrusion was "most useful". He said that lack of restful sleep may compound a motor vehicle accident injury and lead to fibromyalgia. Dr. Yorke noted that Ms Anderson did not suffer from rheumatoid arthritis. He recommended a medication called Tradozone to help Ms Anderson sleep. When Ms Anderson said she did not wish to take this drug, Chamomile tea and over-the-counter sleep aids were recommended.
20  In cross-examination, Dr. Yorke agreed that he examined Ms Anderson only once; that the examination took 30 minutes; and, that it was not "a detailed medical assessment". He agreed that his report was incorrect when it stated that Ms Anderson was "well" before the collision; in this regard he said "the records show that this was not the case". He agreed that the records revealed similar neck and upper back pains prior to the collision, and he opined that the disc protrusion could have been the cause of Ms Anderson's pre-accident back pain, because if it had been caused by the collision then he would have expected immediate symptoms.
21  In relation to the medical condition known as fibromyalgia, Dr. Yorke stated: that the medical community does not know what causes it, but noted that some common triggers are sleep deprivation, psycho-social stress, and physical trauma; that the symptoms are musculoskeletal pains in the four quarters of the body which are not otherwise explained; that fibromyalgia often develops slowly after an event because of continued sleep disruption; and that whiplash causes internal swelling of muscles which may result in sleep deprivation.
22  In relation to a causal link between the collision and Ms Anderson's fibromyalgia, Dr. Yorke said:
I can't say that the fibromyalgia was from the MVA, or that Ms Anderson's symptoms in the fall are from the MVA - a firm diagnosis was not made until January 2009. It is a reasonable expectation that fibromyalgia symptoms will arise within six months [if the MVA is the cause].
23  Rhonda Shuckett is a rheumatologist who examined Ms Anderson on May 24, 2010. She diagnosed Ms Anderson with fibromyalgia. Dr. Shuckett found that Ms Anderson had "sleep challenges" and a positive pain response in 16 fibromyalgia tenderness points. She said it was her experience that it was not unusual for patients to evolve into fibromyalgia after a motor vehicle accident trauma; more precisely, she said "patients descend into fibromyalgia from deconditioning and lack of sleep in the aftermath".
24  In addition to fibromyalgia, Dr. Shuckett also diagnosed (1) neck and upper back injury; (2) cervicogenic headaches; (3) bilateral shoulder tendonitis; and (4) mechanical low back pain.
25  As for a causal link between the collision and Ms Anderson's diagnoses, Dr. Shuckett said:
Her diagnoses are the types of diagnoses that can be linked to a motor vehicle accident. Her symptoms came on soon after the subject MVA. It must be recognized that she had a L shoulder/shoulder girdle problem with pain taking her off work before the subject MVA. She was not working leading to the subject MVA although she says her L shoulder girdle symptoms had regressed shortly before the subject MVA. Her L shoulder girdle symptoms would have rendered her more susceptible to L neck and shoulder girdle pain following the subject MVA. It should be noted that she underwent a neck Xray March 30, 2007 some month before the subject MVA so it seems her doctor was wanting to r/o neck changes on Xray (which was normal); the L trapezius pain could have been referred from the neck. She had a remote "whiplash" while play fighting with a friend but this was about 8 years [later] [Editor's note: Text in brackets is struck out in the original.] [ago] and I do not implicate this old injury in her post MVA symptoms. She says her low back was sensitive to pressure by touch before the subject MVA and she did have a low back Xray the day before the subject MVA which makes one wonder if she had some low back symptoms at that time. She says she just wondered about her back and requested an Xray because at age 13 she was told her back would collapse on her. Her low back Xray and sacroiliac joints were said to be normal the day before the subject MVA.
I believe that the subject MVA materially contributed to all her diagnoses although I will discuss fibromyalgia separately below. Her diagnoses are the sorts of conditions that can occur in the aftermath of an MVA. However, I believe that there were predisposing symptoms which rendered her more susceptible to effects of the MVA, namely her L shoulder girdle and shoulder symptoms that had her off work and some pre existing low back tenderness which she reports to me. The current conditions are, I feel, materially contributed to by the subject MVA as well as pre MVA factors.
She was tried on anti depressants after the MVA and I cannot rule out psychosocial issues contributing to her pain and particularly her fibromyalgia syndrome. Psychosocial factors are not unusual in patients with chronic pain.
Fibromyalgia post traumatic injury is a debated topic. There are a number of published papers in the medical literature which support a relationship between injury and fibromyalgia syndrome. However there are some which counter this association. In my extensive experience dealing with fibromyalgia I find it not unusual for it to emerge in the aftermath of an injury. Theories of what co-factors may underlie evolution to fibromyalgia syndrome post injury include regional areas of pain leading to pain referral, sleep disturbance, deconditioning and psychosocial issues; I believe all of these issues are factors in her. Thus, I believe the MVA significantly materially contributed to her fibromyalgia syndrome although some pre MVA factors such as her pre MVA pains may have been operative here.
26  In cross-examination, Dr. Shuckett agreed that a patient's history - specifically, the accuracy of any pre-existing symptoms - is key to the validity of a diagnosis. In this vein, Dr. Shuckett agreed: that Ms Anderson did not inform her that she suffered from neck pain prior to the collision; that Ms Anderson did not inform her that she had attended to an emergency ward for leg pains within a month prior to the collision; that despite learning from Ms Anderson that she had been informed, at age 13, that her spine would eventually collapse, Dr. Shuckett made no further inquiries because Ms Anderson said she was not suffering from back pain; that a physiotherapist's comment indicating that Ms Anderson had returned to pre-accident pain levels as of June 8, 2007, was noteworthy (albeit not noted) and contrary to Ms Anderson's claim that she had experienced no post-accident improvement; and, that an 11-month gap in visits to Dr. Dang was noteworthy ("one would like to see more continuity").
27  Dr. Shuckett said that she did not review Ms Anderson's medical records until after the examination, in Ms Anderson's absence (as is her practice with all patients); accordingly, she had no opportunity to question Ms Anderson about any inconsistent or additional information provided. She did not elect to contact Ms Anderson thereafter.
28  Notwithstanding the foregoing, Dr. Shuckett defended her opinion regarding causation, with the following comments scattered throughout her cross-examination:
Having read these comments and Dr. Telfer's report, I say that [Ms Anderson] had some chronic problems which could have put her at greater risk; however, I still believe that the MVA materially contributed to the fibromyalgia. Material contribution simply means it played some potential role. It is true that I do not know what caused the fibromyalgia. I can't say with certainty that the MVA played a role in the symptoms which developed in 2008. The injury may have placed her at greater risk; but, it is multi-factorial. It is challenging to ascertain possibility vs. probability. I believe the MVA has materially contributed; but, fibromyalgia can happen spontaneously. I can't say it is the sole causing factor. Stress can be a significant contributing factor. Poor sleep, alone, can bring it on. Psycho-social stressors can play a role.
29  In relation to the biomechanics of the collision, Dr. Shuckett stated that she was unable to say anything about the nature and effect of the impact upon Ms Anderson because she was not a biomechanical engineer; nonetheless, she testified that all aspects of the collision were germane to her assessment and opinion (hence, the full documentation of such in her report). When questioned about the relevance of the circumstances of the collision to her causation opinion, she was unable to articulate a helpful response. She conceded that most persons in low-impact "rear-ender" collisions do not develop fibromyalgia in the aftermath.
Pre-collision Health
30  Ms Anderson testified that prior to the collision she suffered from the common "everyday aches and pains" caused by daily activities. She added that she had a specific problem with her left shoulder which made it difficult for her to hold dogs while she groomed them.
31  Hospital records showed that on March 21, 2007, Ms Anderson attended to the emergency ward of the Langley Memorial Hospital for pains in her right calf. In cross-examination about this visit, Ms Anderson said she could not recall it.
32  Medical records showed that on April 23, 2007 (one day prior to the collision), Ms Anderson sought medical advice about her back and what effect it might have on bearing children, as she was contemplating pregnancy.
33  Norman Dang summarized Ms Anderson's pre-collision health as follows:
Prior to this MVA, Ms Anderson had past episodes of neck, back, and chest pain. She complained of her shoulder feeling loose and grinding during her September 18, 2006 office visit. She mentioned that she had a previous whiplash type injury from horseplay several years prior and she had been tight in the upper trapezius since but she had no persisting neck pain. One day prior to her MVA she was reviewed, concerning her shoulder assessment, by Dr. Tim King, sports medicine. She noted her pain in her legs and recurrent leg swelling. She was tender in her lower thoracic and upper lumbar spine area. XR lumbar spine was ordered on that visit.
. . . She had various neck and shoulder musculoskeletal complaints prior to the MVA, and she had a small L4-5 disc protrusion, documented on CT May 27, 2008.
34  In cross-examination, Dr. Dang agreed that Ms Anderson suffered from "ongoing chest-wall pain" prior to the collision.
35  Charles Telfer is an orthopaedic surgeon who saw Ms Anderson on March 30, 2007 (approximately three weeks prior to the collision), about a complaint of "pain in her neck going into her left scapular shoulder" for the past four years. He reported that Ms Anderson said that she was having ongoing trouble with discomfort in the base of her neck, bilaterally, but predominately to the left, radiating in towards the scapula and upper arm, without distal radiation, numbness, tingling, or other neurological symptoms.
36  Upon examination, Dr. Telfer concluded that Ms Anderson did not have any shoulder pathology and he specifically ruled out bursitis; rather, he opined that she likely suffered from soft-tissue discomfort and cervical spine-related discomfort. He noted more pain symptoms to the left side of the neck than to the right, radiating to the scapula. He found mild decreased range of motion in her neck and a little tenderness in her trapezius.
37  Dr. Telfer believed that Ms Anderson was wrongly describing her pain as emanating from the shoulder; he noted "she was pointing to the side of her neck, not her shoulder". He said that Ms Anderson attributed the neck injury to a "rough-housing" incident during which her head snapped back in a whiplash-type of mechanism: "She immediately developed lots of muscle spasm on both sides of her neck into her shoulder areas and since that time has had ongoing trouble."
38  Ms Anderson reported to Dr. Telfer that she had quit her dog-grooming job because of her pain; however, Dr. Telfer found no physiological reason for Ms Anderson not working. He said that she could manage her mild soft-tissue discomfort with over-the-counter medications, stretching, and strengthening exercises.
39  In cross-examination, Dr. Telfer agreed that Ms Anderson was probably more susceptible to a neck injury because of her prior neck injury.
40  Natalie Wade is a registered massage therapist who first saw Ms Anderson on December 15, 2006. On this date Ms Anderson reported the following: (1) "can't carry a purse"; (2) "hard time breathing"; (3) "uses anti-inflammatory gel/cream"; (4) "pain travels from left neck to left back"; (5) "whiplash three-to-four years ago"; (6) "neck-brace as a child"; and, (7) "bursitis". Ms Wade performed six massage treatments upon Ms Anderson, ending on January 4, 2007. During these treatments Ms Wade said that she felt neck tenderness in Ms Anderson, noted that her pelvis was in paradox (the two sides going in opposite directions), observed that Ms Anderson's right hip protruded more than the left hip, and believed that she had spondylolysis (one vertebra more inward than the others, causing ligamental strain around it) at T12 of her spine. In her December 30 treatment session, Ms Anderson reported incidents of lost vision, dizziness, and difficulty in breathing.
41  Sanjeev Bodwal, physiotherapist, first treated Ms Anderson on September 25, 2006 (seven months prior to the collision). On this date Ms Anderson sought treatment for "pain and grinding in the left shoulder". She reported that she was "off work, currently"; that she had suffered from chest pain since the age of 12; and, that she had, at some time in the past, torn the left-side neck muscles while playing.
42  Mr. Bodwal's first observations were that Ms Anderson's left shoulder blade was elevated and her head was forward. He found full range of motion in the neck, but pain in flexion, abduction, and extension.
43  Ms Anderson had eight therapy sessions with Mr. Bodwal, ending on October 25, 2006. At the September 28 session, Ms Anderson complained of pain behind one of her eyes, in addition to left-side neck pain. On October 20 she complained of "pinching" in the left upper back, and on October 25 she reported "limited participation in normal activities" and experiencing a "popping/rubbing" feeling.
Personal History; Employment and Leisure Pursuits
44  Ms Anderson is 29 years of age. She married Shane Anderson in November 2007, about six months after the collision. She and her husband reside in Surrey, B.C. Ms Anderson is the step-mother to her husband's two teenage children. In December 2007, Mr. Anderson injured his back and now collects a disability pension.
45  Ms Anderson left high school before completing grade 11. Her primary gainful employment (albeit casual and part-time) has been as a pet groomer. In 2004 she earned <damage type = "other">$7,976</damage>; in 2005 she earned <damage type = "other">$7,609</damage>; and, in 2006 she earned <damage type = "other">$136</damage>. In explanation for her very low income in 2006, Ms Anderson said she was a self-employed pet groomer, but "barely did anything" work-wise, in 2006.
46  Ms Anderson testified that she has, since the date of the collision, been unable to work as a pet groomer; more precisely, she said "I don't have the strength to lift and hold a dog." When she was questioned about a job resume (prepared in 2009) which claimed that she worked at Langley Dog Grooming in the years 2006-2008, Ms Anderson explained that this was a "typo" - that it should have read "2004-2005". (The resume also stated that Ms Anderson completed grade 11; an admitted falsehood.)
47  Vicki Danaz owned Langley Dog Grooming in 2007. She was Ms Anderson's employer at the time of the collision. She testified that Ms Anderson was a casual worker who was paid mostly in cash. She recalled Ms Anderson working on the day of the collision. In relation to the employment period prior to the collision, Ms Danaz said that Ms Anderson complained about back, neck and shoulder pains, and that these complaints persisted in the post-collision period. Ms Danaz testified that Ms Anderson continued to work for her throughout 2007, as a casual employee doing pet grooming. She recalled that Ms Anderson quit in early January 2008 because she was contemplating pregnancy and wanted employment which would entitle her to maternity leave benefits.
48  Trina Harris is Vicki Danaz's adult daughter (and Ms Anderson's sister-in-law). In 2007 Ms Harris worked at Waggin' Tails, a pet grooming salon owned by Ms Danaz's then husband. Ms Harris testified that Ms Anderson worked throughout 2007 as a casual employee at both Waggin' Tails and Langley Pet Grooming. She estimated that Ms Anderson worked a total of 20-30 hours per week "fairly consistently" throughout 2007.
49  Ms Harris recalled Ms Anderson on the day of the collision: she said "she was a little shaken up, spoke to ICBC, and left about 2:30 p.m." She testified that Ms Anderson continued to work for both pet grooming salons throughout the remainder of 2007. Her recollection was that Ms Anderson "took the summer off" and returned to work in September. She specifically recalled that she attended Ms Anderson's wedding in November 2007, that Ms Anderson worked during the busy 2007 Christmas season; and, that Ms Anderson quit in early 2008.
50  Ms Harris said that Ms Anderson's post-collision work complaints were no greater than those prior to the collision, when she often complained of a sore back, neck, and wrist, and of having pneumonia. Ms Harris did not observe Ms Anderson having greater difficulty performing her job after the collision.
51  In cross-examination, Ms Harris agreed that she and Ms Anderson "got into a fight" when Ms Anderson quit; however, she asserted that her evidence was truthful, that she had no interest in the outcome of the trial, and that she was upset when she learned that she might have to testify against her sister-in-law.
52  In late 2009 Ms Anderson was briefly employed as a dog groomer at Ildy's Dog Grooming Spa; however, Ms Anderson testified that she quit this job within a month because of her pains: she said "I was going home everyday crying, and cried on the way to work every morning." Ms Anderson's employer, Ildyko Novak, testified that Ms Anderson was "always sick with respiratory problems" but did not complain about pains.
53  Prior to the collision Ms Anderson enjoyed "ATV-ing" with friends, camping, "4x4-ing", hiking, swimming, playing with her step-children, and going on long walks with her husband. Since the collision she has been unable to participate in most of these activities and her aches and pains have strained her personal relationships. Ms Anderson's husband corroborated her testimony in relation to post-collision pain, the inability to participate in activities and household chores, and the negative impact the collision has had on their marital relationship. Mr. Anderson testified that he bought his wife a motorcycle in 2009 in an attempt to re-introduce some fun into her life and distract her from her pain.
The Future
54  Ms Anderson is enrolled in a training course to qualify her as a Resident Care Attendant: an occupation in which one works with persons needing, inter alia, considerable physical assistance. Ms Anderson confirmed that she was aware of the physical demands of this job when she chose it as a new career. When questioned about why she would do so she said: "I know it requires transferring patients from toilets to beds, etc., but I don't know I can't do it until I try it." Shane Anderson testified that when he discussed his wife's future job options, no consideration was given to ones less physically demanding than care attendant to the infirm.
55  Dr. Shuckett expressed reservations about whether Ms Anderson's fibromyalgia symptoms would regress in the future, given her view that they have endured for three years. She commented that vitamin B12 injections presently favoured by Ms Anderson are not a "well evidenced" form of treatment; however, she noted that Ms Anderson seems to find some relief with them. She thought Ms Anderson would have to "pace herself" in the future. She professed to be unaware of the job description of a care aide; however, she thought that assisting in the physical transfer of patients from one spot to another "would likely be challenging for [Ms Anderson]". She added: "I cannot predict whether or not she will do full time work successfully in her chosen field."
C. Findings and Analysis
Whiplash
56  The defendant has not suggested that Ms Anderson has fabricated a whiplash injury, per se. Notwithstanding that Ms Anderson is an admittedly poor historian, and that the impact from the collision was relatively minor, I am satisfied the plaintiff has proved she sustained some degree of whiplash injury, or re-injury, when the defendant's vehicle collided with hers. Whiplash injuries are a relatively common consequence of a "rear-ender" collision, and Ms Anderson's complaints and actions, proximate to the collision, are consistent with having such an injury; in particular, she held her neck at the scene of the collision, she sought immediate medical attention, she made complaints consistent with a whiplash injury, she was diagnosed with neck and back strain in the immediate aftermath of the collision; and she underwent physiotherapy for whiplash.
57  I am also satisfied that the plaintiff has proved that she suffered the effects of her whiplash injury until, at least, June 8, 2007. There is no real dispute in this regard. In this six-week post-collision period, Ms Anderson attended ten physiotherapy sessions. Mr. Bodwal, the physiotherapist who treated Ms Anderson reported that Ms Anderson responded to treatment for whiplash.
58  The period following June 8, 2007, is much more troublesome in relation to proof by the plaintiff that she continued to suffer whiplash symptoms or other ailments caused by the collision. In this regard, it is (a) the state of the plaintiff's pre-collision health and (b) the inconsistencies between the plaintiff's testimony and other evidence which loom large.
Pre-collision health
The evidence establishes that Ms Anderson had many health complaints prior to the collision; moreover, in the pre-collision period proximate to the collision, she had experienced physical pains and symptoms well beyond the "everyday aches and pains" to which she admitted.
On April 23, 2007 (one day prior to the collision), Ms Anderson attended to Dr. Dang about her shoulder and back. On this visit Ms Anderson was sufficiently concerned about her back that she asked if it might be an issue during a pregnancy. At this visit she complained of pain in her legs and recurrent leg swelling. Dr. Dang found that Ms Anderson was "tender in her lower thoracic and upper lumbar spine area" and he ordered an X-ray of her lumbar spine. Shortly prior to this doctor visit, Ms Anderson had twice (Feb. 13 and March 21, 2007) sought treatment at emergency wards; the latter for complaints of pain in her right calf.
On March 30, 2007 (25 days prior to the collision), Ms Anderson saw Dr. Telfer about ongoing neck, trapezium, and upper back pain; symptoms she attributed to a rough-housing incident, four years earlier, in which she injured her neck.
On December 15, 2006 (approximately four months prior to the collision), Ms Anderson reported various health problems and complaints to her massage therapist: "can't carry a purse", "trouble breathing", "pain traveling from left neck to left back" and "bursitis". As she had done with other health professionals, Ms Anderson indicated a history of whiplash and childhood back problems. At her December 30, 2006 treatment, Ms Anderson reported incidents of lost vision, dizziness, and difficulty in breathing. Ms Wade, the treating massage therapist, noted that Ms Anderson's pelvis was in paradox, her right hip protruded, and she had spondylolysis in her back.
In September and October 2006 physiotherapy sessions, Ms Anderson complained of left-side neck pain, pinching in her left upper back, pain behind one of her eyes, a "popping/rubbing feeling", and limitations on participating in normal activities. She reported that she had suffered chest pain since the age of 12 and had torn her neck muscles in a rough-housing incident [about four years earlier]. Mr. Bodwal, the treating physiotherapist, noted that Ms Anderson's left shoulder and shoulder blade were elevated and that her head was forward. He found neck pain with flexion, abduction, and extension.
Ms Anderson also reported aspects of her pre-collision health to Mr. Bodwal when he treated her, again, in the post-collision period. On May 7, 2007, Ms Anderson reported a pre-collision health history which included acid reflux, a stomach ulcer, and chronic lumbar spine problems and pain since the age of 12.
Inconsistencies
Ms Anderson testified that her symptoms worsened, rather than improved, during the course of her physiotherapy. This was contrary to the testimony of the physiotherapist. In the immediate post-collision period Ms Anderson said she developed lower back, leg, and hand pain but did not mention it because she thought "it was part of getting better". Mr. Bodwal testified that Ms Anderson responded positively to therapy and that she had, by June 8, recovered to her pre-collision state. When questioned about Mr. Bodwal's records, Ms Anderson did not deny that she had told Mr. Bodwal that she was "significantly better"; rather, she said that it was not true - that she said it because she "wanted the pain to stop". She was unable to explain how misleading the physiotherapist about her recovery would have helped stop her pain.
Ms Anderson testified that since the collision she has been unable to work. This is contrary to the testimony of Ms Danaz and Ms Harris who said that Ms Anderson worked as a pet groomer for Langley Dog Grooming and Waggin' Tails throughout 2007. It was also contrary to the notations of Mr. Bodwal, Dr. Dang, and a physician named Marcia Prest in clinical visits in the 2007 post-collision period of 2007. In relation to the doctors' notes Ms Anderson explained that each must have misunderstood her. Finally, Ms Anderson's own work resume reported that she worked at Langley Dog Grooming from 2006 to 2008, and her explanation that both dates were typographical errors was less than convincing.
On Ms Anderson's first visit to Dr. Dang after the collision, Dr. Dang made note of the collision circumstances as related by Ms Anderson. In relation to the impact he noted that she was rear-ended; that her head struck the headrest; and that there was no loss of consciousness. At trial Ms Anderson testified to a much more dramatic event; one in which her chest struck the steering wheel, her head struck the headrest "hard"; her head and neck cracked, and she may have lost consciousness. Dr. Dang testified that Ms Anderson first advised him that she experienced a cracking sensation in her head and neck one year after the collision. Ms Anderson agreed that she did not "mention" the head and neck cracking to Dr. Dang until this time, and she offered no reasonable explanation for such a significant omission. It is noteworthy that if Mr. Anderson's testimony is correct then Ms Anderson was well aware of the cracking and her suspected loss of consciousness immediately after the collision, yet she failed to mention it to her doctor the next day, or at any time in the ensuing year.
Ms Anderson claims that there was no hiatus in her symptoms after the collision, despite a lengthy gap between doctor visits (from July 14, 2007, to February 25, 2008). On February 25, 2008, she saw Dr. Dang only for GERD complaints. On April 24, 2008, she complained of neck and back pain and other symptoms. In her testimony Ms Anderson claimed that she developed back, leg and hand pain, and tingling in her feet within two months of the collision. She said that the onset of "entire body" pain started very soon after the collision; however, she was unable to be specific about the timing and explained that she did not report it because she thought it would "go away" - that it was "all part of getting better".
59  Where the evidence of Ms Anderson is at variation with that of the aforementioned health professionals, I accept their testimony as accurate and truthful. As previously noted, the plaintiff concedes that Ms Anderson is a poor historian; moreover, there is considerable consistency among the medical professionals in relation to Ms Anderson's pre-collision health.
60  I am satisfied that the reliable evidence establishes that at the time of the collision Ms Anderson was suffering from: (a) chronic back problems; (b) chronic neck and back pain; (c) chronic chest pain with attendant breathing difficulties; and (d) periodic severe leg pains. It also shows that Ms Anderson had relatively recent incidents of leg swelling, blurry vision, and dizziness, and a history of GERD and a stomach ulcer.
61  In relation to the question of whether Ms Anderson continued to work after the collision, the preponderant evidence is that she did so, and in a similar fashion to before the collision. Her employer and a co-worker gave convincing testimony in this regard; moreover, Ms Anderson's own statements to various medical professionals and in her employment resume suggested that this was so.
62  In relation to the collision's immediate effect upon her, I find Ms Anderson's trial version quite troubling. It is inconsistent with the account she gave the day following the collision to her family physician; in particular, she did not report that her head and neck cracked or that she thought she might have lost consciousness. Shane Anderson's testimony that Ms Anderson said these very things to him on the day of the collision is similarly vexing; it suggests, regrettably, that he may be stretching the truth to assist his wife in her claim. I am satisfied that the impact from this very minor collision was relatively slight: consistent with the version Ms Anderson related to her physician the day following the collision and not with that given at trial.
Fibromyalgia
63  It falls to the plaintiff to prove not only that she has fibromyalgia, but also that it was caused by the collision. In relation to the former, I am so satisfied.
64  The plaintiff tendered the opinions of two rheumatologists, Drs. Yorke and Shuckett, who examined Ms Anderson and tested her for fibromyalgia. Each formed the opinion that Ms Anderson has this unfortunate medical condition. No evidence of a contrary expert opinion was tendered. A diagnosis of fibromyalgia is well within the expertise of Drs. Yorke and Shuckett; there was no suggestion otherwise. On January 28, 2009, Dr. Yorke tested Ms Anderson and found "a total fibromyalgia positive score of 12/18 (a minimum of 11 responses are required to support the diagnosis)". Dr. Shuckett examined Ms Anderson on May 24, 2010, and found "she had 16-18 out of 18 painful fibromyalgia tender points distributed in all four quadrants of the body".
65  The more challenging evidentiary hurdle for the plaintiff is proof of a causal link between her fibromyalgia and the defendant's negligent act. In this regard, I must conclude that the plaintiff has failed.
66  Dr. Yorke did not address the cause of the plaintiff's fibromyalgia in his report, and in his testimony he was unable to say that Ms Anderson's fibromyalgia was caused by the collision. In relation to the cause(s) of fibromyalgia, generally, Dr. Yorke said that the medical community does not know what causes it. He said that in cases where trauma is the suspected cause, it is reasonable to expect that symptoms of fibromyalgia will develop within six months. Dr. Yorke was questioned about the cause of Ms Anderson's fibromyalgia, as follows:
 Q:  You believe that she recovered from her accident injuries within two-to-three months? 
 A:  She was substantially better two-to-three months afterwards, yes. 
 Q:  Okay, and the flare-up of complaints months later is - you cannot attribute that to the accident? 
 A:  Um, I don't know why her complaints began later. There may have been other circumstances in her life. There may be other events that - that are attributable to that worsening; but, no, I don't attribute those to the accident. 
67  Dr. Shuckett specifically addressed causation in her report, and wrote: "I believe the MVA significantly materially contributed to [Ms Anderson's] fibromyalgia syndrome, although some pre MVA factors such as her pre MVA pains may have been operative here." In cross-examination, Dr. Shuckett said that her words "materially contributed" meant "played some potential role".
68  Dr. Shuckett testified that a patient's history is key to the diagnosis, and she described Ms Anderson as "a clear and bright historian"; however, when several apparent inconsistencies and omissions in Ms Anderson's stated history were brought to Dr. Shuckett's attention, she agreed that they were relevant and noteworthy. Dr. Shuckett then revised her description of Ms Anderson to one of "pretty fluent historian, whether everything was correct or not". Dr. Shuckett stated that it was her practice not to read medical histories until after her examination. In this instance, Dr. Shuckett failed, post-examination, to identify relevant inconsistencies and accepted Ms Anderson's selective oral history as the primary foundation for her reported opinions. For example, Dr. Shuckett agreed that Ms Anderson did not inform her that she had neck or back pain before the collision; or, that she had leg pains the day before the collision; or, that she had attended to the emergency ward in relation to leg pain within the month prior to the collision.
69  Dr. Shuckett agreed that it was noteworthy that Ms Anderson's physiotherapy records for June 8, 2007, stated she was "back to pre-MVA levels" whereas Ms Anderson informed her that she had experienced no improvement with physiotherapy. She was not aware of this inconsistency when she wrote her report. Dr. Shuckett knew that Ms Anderson was told, at age 13, that her spine would eventually collapse; however, Dr. Shuckett did not question this rather alarming historical prognosis. Similarly surprising was Dr. Shuckett's failure to question Ms Anderson's plans to become a care aide, given her diagnosis and prognosis. When Dr. Shuckett's attention was drawn to the protracted gap in doctor visits in 2007-2008, Dr. Shuckett agreed that it was noteworthy and said "one would like to see more continuity".
70  In addition to the foregoing which, collectively, significantly undermines Dr. Shuckett's opinions, she was unable to articulate why she believed that the collision, given its very minor nature, "significantly materially contributed" to Ms Anderson's fibromyalgia. On the one hand she asserted that it was "very important to document all aspects of the MVA"; on the other, she said "I can't say anything about the importance of impact - I am not a biomechanical engineer."
Test for causation
71  The test for causation is succinctly stated in Resurfice Corp. v. Hanke, , by McLachlin C.J.C., delivering the judgment of the Court:
[21] First, the basic test for determining causation remains the "but for" test. This applies to multi-cause injuries. The plaintiff bears the burden of showing that "but for" the negligent act or omission of each defendant, the injury would not have occurred. Having done this, contributory negligence may be apportioned, as permitted by statute.
22 This fundamental rule has never been displaced and remains the primary test for causation in negligence actions. As stated in Athey v. Leonati, , at para. 14, per Major J., "[t]he general, but not conclusive, test for causation is the 'but for' test, which requires the plaintiff to show that the injury would not have occurred but for the negligence of the defendant." Similarly, as I noted in Blackwater v. Plint, , at para. 78, "[t]he rules of causation consider generally whether 'but for' the defendant's acts, the plaintiff's damages would have been incurred on a balance of probabilities."
23 The "but for" test recognizes that compensation for negligent conduct should only be made "where a substantial connection between the injury and defendant's conduct" is present. It ensures that a defendant will not be held liable for the plaintiff's injuries where they "may very well be due to factors unconnected to the defendant and not the fault of anyone": Snell v. Farrell, , at p. 327, per Sopinka J.
24 However, in special circumstances, the law has recognized exceptions to the basic "but for" test, and applied a "material contribution" test. Broadly speaking, the cases in which the "material contribution" test is properly applied involve two requirements.
25 First, it must be impossible for the plaintiff to prove that the defendant's negligence caused the plaintiff's injury using the "but for" test. The impossibility must be due to factors that are outside of the plaintiff's control; for example, current limits of scientific knowledge. Second, it must be clear that the defendant breached a duty of care owed to the plaintiff, thereby exposing the plaintiff to an unreasonable risk of injury, and the plaintiff must have suffered that form of injury. In other words, the plaintiff's injury must fall within the ambit of the risk created by the defendant's breach. In those exceptional cases where these two requirements are satisfied, liability may be imposed, even though the "but for" test is not satisfied, because it would offend basic notions of fairness and justice to deny liability by applying a "but for" approach.
26 These two requirements are helpful in defining the situations in which an exception to the "but for" approach ought to be permitted. Without dealing exhaustively with the jurisprudence, a few examples may assist in demonstrating the twin principles just asserted.
27 One situation requiring an exception to the "but for" test is the situation where it is impossible to say which of two tortious sources caused the injury, as where two shots are carelessly fired at the victim, but it is impossible to say which shot injured him: Cook v. Lewis, . Provided that it is established that each of the defendants carelessly or negligently created an unreasonable risk of that type of injury that the plaintiff in fact suffered (i.e. carelessly or negligently fired a shot that could have caused the injury), a material contribution test may be appropriately applied.
28 A second situation requiring an exception to the "but for" test may be where it is impossible to prove what a particular person in the causal chain would have done had the defendant not committed a negligent act or omission, thus breaking the "but for" chain of causation. For example, although there was no need to rely on the "material contribution" test in Walker Estate v. York Finch Hospital, , this Court indicated that it could be used where it was impossible to prove that the donor whose tainted blood infected the plaintiff would not have given blood if the defendant had properly warned him against donating blood. Once again, the impossibility of establishing causation and the element of injury-related risk created by the defendant are central.
72  Recently, the "but for" test was re-affirmed in Clements (Litigation guardian of) v. Clements, . Frankel J.A., delivering the judgment of the court said:
47 Although the discussion of the material-contribution test in Resurfice Corp. is obiter dicta -- the appeal was allowed on the basis that the Court of Appeal should not have interfered with the finding of the trial judge that the manner in which the plaintiff was injured was not reasonably foreseeable -- the Supreme Court of Canada clearly intended to provide guidance with respect to the issue of causation. Accordingly, what it said must be accepted as authoritative in that regard: Reilly v. Canada (Attorney General), ,  at paras. 69, 70, applying R. v. Henry, , .
48 However, I do not read Resurfice Corp. as supporting resort to the material-contribution test whenever a defendant's negligence has materially increased a plaintiff's risk of injury and it is impossible for the plaintiff to prove that that negligence was a factual cause of the injury. To do so would substantially alter the existing law and would have the effect of displacing but-for as the primary test for determining causation. It is only in exceptional circumstances that resort to the material-contribution test will, as a matter of policy, be appropriate.
49 It is important to keep in mind that in Resurfice Corp., the Court was not purporting to change the law but, rather, was reaffirming existing principles. This is evinced by the fact that McLachlin C.J. referred to two of the Court's previous decisions as examples of when the material-contribution test could properly be used to find causation.
73  Having regard to the foregoing and the issues raised by the circumstances herein, I must conclude that the case at bar is not one for which the "but for" test is unworkable, and for which resort to the "material contribution" is appropriate, as if it were available as a mere alternative if proof of causation failed on application of the "but for" test.
74  Applying, then, the "but for" test, I conclude that the evidence falls far short of proving, on a balance of probabilities, that but for the negligence of the defendant, Ms Anderson would not have developed fibromyalgia. In reaching this conclusion I take into account, inter alia, the absence of convincing medical opinion in this regard, the minor nature of the collision, the absence of credible evidence of a temporal nexus between the collision and the onset of symptoms, the reliable evidence of the plaintiff's return to her pre-collision state within two months of the collision, the chronic and acute pre-collision health complaints of the plaintiff, and the significant hiatus in doctor visits in a critical post-collision period.
D. Damages
75  The plaintiff suffered a whiplash injury in the collision. The evidence suggests that it was most likely an exacerbation of an existing complaint. Shortly after the injury she began a course of physiotherapy. Reliable evidence in this regard shows that she responded well to treatment and was substantially recovered within six weeks. The defendant submits that the injuries, or any exacerbation of a pre-existing injury, attributable to the defendant were fully resolved within three months, at most. I agree. A generous view of the evidence establishes, at most, a three-month period to full recovery to Ms Anderson's pre-collision state. The plaintiff's losses must be assessed accordingly.
Non-pecuniary
76  The defendant submits that the appropriate range for non-pecuniary damages is <damage type = "other">$2,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$5,000</damage>. In support of this position, the defendant cites: Kain v. Kirkman,  (B.C.S.C.), (<damage type = "other">$6,000</damage>); Mohammed v. Rai,  (B.C.S.C.), (<damage type = "other">$3,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$5,000</damage>); Bagasbas v. Atwal,  (B.C.S.C.), (<damage type = "other">$3,500</damage>); Knauff v. Gower,  (B.C.P.C.), (<damage type = "other">$1,500</damage>); and, Siddoo v. Michael,  (B.C.P.C.), (<damage type = "other">$1,500</damage>).
77  The plaintiff submits that the appropriate range is <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$90,000</damage>, and cited several cases in support thereof; however, her position rested upon a trial finding that the defendant caused Ms Anderson's fibromyalgia and such was not the outcome.
78  In assessing the non-pecuniary damages for Ms Anderson, I am unable to distinguish her losses from the ordinary sort of losses most suffer from a minor whiplash injury. I am, however, satisfied that the plaintiff was more fragile than many others would have been at the time of the collision and that, therefore, her post-collision aches and pains may well have been greater than those experienced by an otherwise strong and healthy person. I am satisfied that Ms Anderson's life was negatively affected by the injury, or re-injury, and that during the three-month recovery period her relationships suffered to some degree, she endured some pain and discomfort, she lost some sleep, she opted out of some leisure and sport activities, and she was put to various inconveniences. For this three-month period of pain and suffering, with due regard to the cases cited, I assess her damages at <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$6,000</damage>. Any lost homemaking capacity in this period is subsumed into this award.
Special
79  The plaintiff claims <damage type = "other">$206.91</damage> for various medications, <damage type = "sub-special">$120</damage> for physiotherapy "user fees", and <damage type = "other">$49.90</damage> for a Guildford gym pass. The defendant opposes these claims, other than the physiotherapy user fees, on the basis that they are unrelated to the injury caused by the collision.
80  In proof of the pharmaceuticals claim the plaintiff tendered a pharmacy invoice; however, for the three-month period in question (April 24-July 24, 2007) the only pharmaceuticals purchased were birth control pills. Similarly, the record of payments for a gym pass shows no payments related to the period in question - they do not commence until August 17, 2007. The evidence does not, therefore, support the opposed claims. Special damages are fixed at <damage type = "special">$120</damage>.
Past Income Loss
81  The plaintiff has failed to prove that she suffered income loss in the three-month period in question. In relation to post-collision employment, the evidence of Ms Anderson is unreliable. It is inconsistent with her resume and her statements to several medical professionals, and contrary to the testimony of Ms Danaz and Ms Harris, who said that Ms Anderson's employment was unaffected by the collision. For these reasons, the claim for past income loss is dismissed.
Future Losses/Costs
82  These claims were premised upon Ms Anderson proving that fibromyalgia, which rendered her partially disabled, was caused by the defendant. For reasons given, she has failed to do so. The evidence establishes that Ms Anderson returned to her pre-collision state (albeit a compromised one) within three months of the collision; accordingly, these claims are dismissed.
E. Disposition
83  The plaintiff's claims for non-pecuniary damages (<damage type = "non-pecuniary">$6,000</damage>) and special damages (<damage type = "special">$120</damage>) are allowed; the remaining damages claims are dismissed. If the parties are unable to resolve the issue of costs then they may submit written argument.
L.W. BERNARD J.
End of Document
Berenjian v. Primus, [2013] B.C.J. No. 194
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
J.W. Williams J.
Heard: February 20-24, 2012.
Judgment: February 5, 2013.
Docket: M072679
Registry: Vancouver
[2013] B.C.J. No. 194   |   2013 BCSC 172
Between Adel Berenjian, Plaintiff Andrew Primus and John Paul Primus, Defendants
(84 paras.)
Case Summary
Tort law — Negligence — Contributory negligence — Duty of care — Pedestrians — Motor vehicles — Pedestrians — Rules of the road — Action for injuries suffered in a 2006 motor vehicle accident allowed in part — Plaintiff was struck on a crosswalk while the defendant was making a right hand turn on a red light — Defendant was solely liable for the accident by failing to ensure that the right turn could made in safety — Plaintiff was properly entitled to cross in front of the defendant's car.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Special damages — Expenses and expenditures — Therapy or rehabilitation — Non-pecuniary damages — Pain and suffering — Action for injuries suffered in a 2006 motor vehicle accident allowed in part — Plaintiff was struck on a crosswalk while the defendant was making a right hand turn on a red light — Plaintiff awarded <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$5,000</damage> for non-pecuniary damages and <damage type = "special">$500</damage> in special damages for part of chiropractor costs incurred — There was some soft tissue injury, bruising and discomfort, but it was fairly minor — Court did not accept severity of injuries as alleged by plaintiff.
Action for injuries suffered in a 2006 motor vehicle accident. The plaintiff was struck on a crosswalk while the defendant was making a right hand turn on a red light. The plaintiff claimed that he sustained injuries to his left arm and left knee as well as to his neck and back. The defendant argued that the plaintiff was contributorily negligent in the occurrence of the collision and that he had not established a basis that would entitle him to receive any damages other than a most minimal award. The plaintiff missed one day of work as a consequence of the injury. He said that he experienced substantial difficulty in performing his work for three weeks, and that his ability to do household chores was adversely impacted for a considerable time. He also alleged his ability to jog and exercise was severely impacted. He claimed the primary symptoms resolved over 18 months, and there was reducing intermittent low back discomfort since that time. In his submission, an appropriate award for non-pecuniary damages was <damage type = "other">$30,000</damage>. 

HELD: Action allowed in part.
 The defendant was solely liable for the accident. It was more likely than not that a walk signal was displayed when the plaintiff stepped off the sidewalk and into the crosswalk. The plaintiff was inside the marked crosswalk area at the time contact was made by the defendant's automobile. The defendant failed to ensure that his turn could be made safely by turning his attention to traffic coming from the left rather than to ensure that there was no pedestrian in the crosswalk. The plaintiff was properly entitled to cross in front of the defendant's car. The court was concerned with the veracity of the plaintiff's claims regarding the extent, severity and effects of the injuries he suffered. There was no notable objective evidence to support his assertions of the quite extensive nature of the consequences. There was some soft tissue injury, bruising and discomfort, but it was fairly minor in that he was able to resume his running within a month. While there might have been some lingering residual discomfort, it was of a fairly modest magnitude. The plaintiff was awarded non-pecuniary damages of <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$4,000</damage> and <damage type = "special">$500</damage> for part of the chiropractor costs incurred. The court did not accept that all of the costs incurred were required as a result of the injuries suffered in the accident.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Motor Vehicle Act, , s. 132, s. 144
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: D.J. Sinnott.
Counsel for the Defendants: T.H. Pettit.
Reasons for Judgment
J.W. WILLIAMS J.
1   The plaintiff Mr. Berenjian brings this action to recover damages from the driver of an automobile which struck him and, he says, injured him.
Background Circumstances
2  At time of trial, Mr. Berenjian was 54 years of age; he was 48 years old when the accident occurred.
3  At, or shortly after, 6:00 p.m. on April 5, 2006, the plaintiff was on foot and travelling northbound on the sidewalk adjacent to Taylor Way in West Vancouver. He arrived at the intersection where Keith Road intersects with Taylor Way. He began to cross Keith Road, walking in the marked crosswalk.
4  An automobile owned by the defendant John Paul Primus and driven by his son Andrew Primus was at the corner. Andrew Primus was in the process of turning right from Keith Road onto Taylor Way, with the intention of heading southbound. The light was green for traffic travelling northbound and southbound on Taylor Way and was red for traffic on Keith Road. Nevertheless, Andrew Primus was lawfully permitted to turn right on the red light, so long as that turn could be made in safety. In fact, in the matter at bar, it is apparent that Andrew Primus moved his vehicle forward, into that right turn, at a time when the plaintiff was in front of the vehicle. Contact was made.
5  Following the collision, Andrew Primus pulled his vehicle over and spoke with the plaintiff. The plaintiff pulled himself together and after some time had passed was transported to his nearby home by two persons who were witnesses to the event.
6  The plaintiff claims that he sustained injuries to his left arm and left knee as well as to his neck and back.
7  He brings this action to recover damages for the injuries and the effect they had upon him.
Positions of the Parties
8  The plaintiff says that he was lawfully in the intersection, crossing on a light displaying a walk sign, when he was struck. He says that he sustained a number of injuries; some of those resolved quickly, others took some considerable time to resolve. He says that those injuries caused him pain and suffering, and interfered with a number of his ordinary activities.
9  He seeks to recover damages accordingly.
10  The defendants concede that the automobile struck the plaintiff in the course of negotiating the right turn. The defendants challenges the proposition that the plaintiff was in the intersection on a walk signal, and says as well that the plaintiff was careless in the manner in which he attempted to cross the street. The defendants also say that the extent of the injuries was minor, so minor as to amount to virtually nothing. He disputes the plaintiff's contention that the injuries were of any moment or that they actually caused him any pain and suffering or impacted upon his ordinary activities.
11  In short, the defendants say that the plaintiff was contributorily negligent in the occurrence of the collision and that he has not established a basis that would entitle him to receive any damages other than a most minimal award.
Discussion
12  There were three witnesses at trial able to testify with respect to the manner in which the collision occurred: the plaintiff, the defendant Andrew Primus, and a person who was in another automobile at the scene and who observed the events, Ms. Williams.
13  The plaintiff has testified about his injuries; he also adduces in support the evidence of two medical professionals, a general practitioner and a chiropractor who treated him.
14  In advancing their position, the defendants rely upon their own evidence as well as that of an ICBC adjuster who had dealings with the plaintiff after the event, and the testimony of Dr. Leith, an orthopaedic surgeon. The defendants have also tendered video evidence of certain activities of the plaintiff in the time period following the event.
15  I propose to deal with the matter under three separate headings:
collision and liability;
injuries and consequences;
damages.
Collision and Liability
16  The evidence establishes to my satisfaction that, at the time the automobile struck the plaintiff, he (the plaintiff) was in the crosswalk at the intersection. It is also beyond dispute that the light for northbound and southbound vehicular traffic on Taylor Way was green.
17  There was controversy at trial as to whether the plaintiff stepped into the intersection when he had the benefit of a walk light for his crossing, or whether the light was stale and a "don't walk" signal was being displayed.
18  The only direct evidence on that point comes from the plaintiff. He says that when he stepped off the sidewalk, there was a walk signal displayed. Based upon some concerns I have of the complete accuracy of his description of events at the intersection, including the presence of other vehicles and pedestrians, I am not without some reservations as to the correctness of his description and particularly with respect to the signal. Nevertheless, the other witnesses are not in a position to dispute that there was a walk signal displayed; the most that can be said is that the state of the light at that intersection was probably somewhat stale at the time. I should note that there is no evidence before this Court that would indicate whether the walk signal at the intersection is triggered by the action of a pedestrian wishing to cross the street, or whether the walk signal is displayed as part of the green light cycle for north-south traffic.
19  In the circumstances, recognizing that the standard to be met is one of a balance of probabilities, I conclude it is more likely than not that a walk signal was displayed when the plaintiff stepped off the sidewalk and into the crosswalk.
20  I conclude as well that the plaintiff was inside the marked crosswalk area at the time contact was made by the defendants' automobile.
21  The defence also submits that there is reason to conclude that the plaintiff was not paying sufficient attention to other traffic at the time he was crossing Keith Road. That contention is based primarily upon video evidence which has been tendered, showing the plaintiff running from his place of work in downtown Vancouver to his residence in West Vancouver. The defendants note that he appears to ordinarily run with some sort of a jacket hood on his head and that compromises his ability to see all his surroundings, and, as well, that he appears in the videos to have a tendency to cross roads even though no walk signal is displayed.
22  I have taken those factors into consideration, but cannot find a basis to extrapolate from those rather general suggestions to a conclusion that the plaintiff was not taking sufficient care as he crossed the street.
23  The core submission advanced by the defendants with respect to liability, as set out in their submissions, is as follows:
Mr. Berenjian breached the standard of care of a reasonable person and did not pay sufficient attention to see the danger and crossed without adequately looking. Certainly, he admits failing to look to his left but that appears as more as [sic] an example of general carelessness on the plaintiff's part than the relevant breach in the case at hand: here, the Primus vehicle was directly ahead of the plaintiff and bright yellow to boot. It was there to be seen but the plaintiff failed to see it.
The plaintiff proceeded presumably at a fast walk or slow jog in front of the defendant's vehicle and, only too late, noticed it. He took some evasive steps, but, by this time, it was too late. He had already put himself in front of a vehicle that was moving forward with a driver not looking ahead.
24  The plaintiff's position is that he was lawfully in an intersection and that the defendant driver was turning right in the face of a red light. He contends that a driver in such a situation has a clear statutory duty not to move into his turn until it can be done in safety.
25  The defendants agree that the driver has a greater duty of care than the pedestrian, but urge the Court to find contributory negligence on the part of the plaintiff, something in the order of 40%.
26  In my view, the defendants' position cannot succeed.
27  The relevant statutory provisions from the Motor Vehicle Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 318, are as follows:
Pedestrian controls
132 (1) When the word "walk" or an outline of a walking person is exhibited at an intersection by a pedestrian traffic control signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal in a marked or unmarked crosswalk and has the right of way over all vehicles in the intersection or any adjacent crosswalk.
When the word "walk" or an outline of a walking person is exhibited at a place other than an intersection by a pedestrian traffic control signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and has the right of way over all vehicles.
When the word "wait", the words "don't walk" or an outline of a raised hand are exhibited at an intersection or at a place other than an intersection by a pedestrian traffic control signal,
a pedestrian must not enter the roadway, and
a pedestrian proceeding across the roadway and facing the word "wait", the words "don't walk", or an outline of a raised hand exhibited after he or she entered the roadway
must proceed to the sidewalk as quickly as possible, and
has the right of way for that purpose over all vehicles.
...
Red light
129 (1) Subject to subsection (2), when a red light alone is exhibited at an intersection by a traffic control signal, the driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection and facing the red light must cause it to stop before entering the marked crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no marked crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and subject to the provisions of subsection (3), must not cause the vehicle to proceed until a traffic control signal instructs the driver that he or she is permitted to do so.
The driver of a bus approaching an intersection and facing a red light and a prescribed white rectangular indicator may cause the bus to proceed through the intersection.
Despite subsection (1), and except when a right turn permitted by this subsection is prohibited by a sign at an intersection, the driver of a vehicle facing the red light, and which in obedience to it is stopped as closely as practicable to a marked crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no marked crosswalk, as closely as practicable to the intersection, may cause the vehicle to make a right turn, but the driver must yield the right of way to all pedestrians and vehicles lawfully proceeding as directed by the signal at the intersection.
...
Careless driving prohibited
144 (1) A person must not drive a motor vehicle on a highway
without due care and attention,
without reasonable consideration for other persons using the highway, ...
28  I have found on the appropriate standard of proof that the plaintiff was lawfully in the intersection, crossing as a pedestrian. I am also quite satisfied that the defendant Andrew Primus was principally concerned with being able to turn from Keith Road onto Taylor Way in safety, and that the focus of his attention was the state of the traffic travelling southbound on Taylor Way. As a result, he was not sufficiently aware of what was happening immediately in front of his car and to his right.
29  While it is understandable that he would be concerned with the state of the traffic coming from the left, the fact remains that he was obliged to ensure that there was no pedestrian in the crosswalk, and he failed to do so.
30  I have been referred to the decision of Grist J. in MacKnight v. Nast, . That case which involved the plaintiff, a pedestrian, being struck by a bicycle, while she was in a crosswalk, is factually dissimilar.
31  There, the plaintiff was in a marked crosswalk and had actuated the traffic signals. The automobile traffic had come to a stop. The defendant was riding his bicycle on the right-hand side of the road; he passed the stopped cars and rode into the crosswalk at speed. He saw the plaintiff at the last minute, but was unable to stop and struck her.
32  The Court was invited to find contributory negligence on the basis that, even though the plaintiff was lawfully crossing the street, she was under an obligation to take reasonable care for her own safety, notwithstanding the right of way, and so some measure of responsibility should be allocated to her.
33  Grist J. proceeded from the proposition that contributory negligence, which is based on an obligation to take reasonable care for one's own safety, depends on the foreseeability of the risk presented by the defendant's negligence. In those circumstances, where the plaintiff was in a marked crosswalk, with the traffic control signals functioning and the automobiles having stopped, he concluded it was not reasonably foreseeable that the defendant would disregard the signal and proceed at a significant rate of speed in the space between three stopped vehicles and the curb. To find contributory negligence would "stretch the obligation of reasonable foresight too far".
34  In the present case, it is my view that the principle applies in a similar way. The plaintiff was crossing the street, in a crosswalk and with a walk signal being displayed. The defendants' vehicle was stopped and facing a red light. In those circumstances, the plaintiff was properly entitled to cross in front of the car. I do not accept that a pedestrian in such a situation should be expected to reasonably foresee that the driver of the vehicle will make his turn without taking proper care to ensure he can do so in safety.
35  In the result, I conclude that the defendant Andrew Primus is liable for the collision and that there is no basis to find contributory negligence on the part of the plaintiff.
The Plaintiff's Injuries and Consequences
36  The plaintiff says that as the defendants' automobile moved forward and toward him, he held out his arm to catch the driver's attention. Nevertheless, the automobile struck him on the left side.
37  I am satisfied that the vehicle was not moving at a high rate of speed when the contact occurred. It would appear that Andrew Primus had been inching forward as he waited for his opportunity to turn right. He evidently identified what he thought to be an appropriate break in the traffic and began to move into his right-hand turn. He testified that he was just in the process of releasing the clutch at about the time the contact was made.
38  The plaintiff describes the point of contact as his left knee and leg and his left hand. He says that he was knocked partially off of his feet but managed to scramble up. He also says that he subsequently experienced substantial pain in his neck, accompanied by headache, and in his low back area.
39  He attended upon his family doctor the day following and then saw the doctor again for the injuries on one further occasion, that is, on April 10, 2006. On the occasion of the first visit, the doctor prescribed a semi-narcotic analgesic for pain relief. He also recommended that the plaintiff attend physiotherapy and suggested that an over-the-counter pain medication as well as icing would be appropriate for the treatment of ongoing pain.
40  The plaintiff made two attendances on a physiotherapist; there are no records of that treatment or outcome in evidence.
41  In addition, the plaintiff began a course of treatment with a chiropractor, Dr. Wright. He first saw her on May 27, 2006 and then subsequently on 17 separate subsequent occasions. Initially, the visits were quite frequent; in the first two months, he saw Dr. Wright nine different times. The frequency of the visits diminished over time. His last attendance was January 13 of 2007.
42  The plaintiff's description of the injuries and their duration and effect is as follows:
Left knee: he says the knee was bruised; he treated the injury with ice and the pain was resolved within one week.
His left arm: he says for the first five to seven days, he was unable to lift his hand over his shoulder. That situation improved with the chiropractic treatment and by June of 2007, it was substantially resolved. There was lingering discomfort through the end of the year.
Neck: the plaintiff says that he had significant neck discomfort for the first six months; it largely resolved within 12 months of the incident, and was completely cleared up 18 months after the accident. His headaches had resolved within six to eight months.
Low back: the plaintiff says that his back was 75-80% recovered by the summer of 2007. He also says that recovery was virtually complete following that, so long as he maintained an exercise program. He described lingering discomfort when he failed to be active.
43  In terms of the effect upon his everyday life, the plaintiff missed one day of work as a consequence of the injury. He said that he experienced substantial difficulty in performing his work (tailoring of clothing) for a period of approximately three weeks, and that his ability to do household chores was adversely impacted for a considerable time. He says it took a year for him to get back to normal in that regard - cooking, cleaning, and yard work.
44  He also claims that the injury caused him considerable difficulty because it interfered with his exercise activities.
45  That has turned out to be a matter of some real contention in this case.
46  It is clear that the plaintiff is substantially dedicated to exercise and fitness. Indeed, at the time of the accident, he was in the course of jogging from his place of work in downtown Vancouver to his residence in West Vancouver. His usual practice was to run home from work four or five days per week.
47  The plaintiff says that one of the ways the injuries from the accident have impacted his routine is that, because of them, he was not able to run in the usual fashion, and it was in fact some time later that he was able to get back to his pre-accident routine. His Statement of Claim also contains the assertion that he suffered from anxiety as a result of the accident - presumably that it caused him to be afraid and traumatized by jogging in traffic. In fact, that complaint was not maintained at trial, and, at any rate, the video evidence would tend to refute such a claim.
48  The claim with respect to his jogging activities having been seriously impacted is quite robustly disputed by the defendants. They say that in fact, the plaintiff had resumed his practice of running home from work within a short time of the accident. Specifically, both Andrew Primus and his father John Paul Primus describe seeing the plaintiff, dressed similarly to how he had been attired at the time of the accident, at the intersection of Marine Drive and Taylor Way. They described him as "apparently jogging"; at the specific point they saw him, he was awaiting a light to change in order to cross the street, and was jogging on the spot. Additionally, both of these witnesses describe observing the plaintiff running, apparently as he had been prior to the accident, within two or three weeks of the accident.
49  There is also the evidence of the ICBC adjuster. She testified about having two meetings with the plaintiff. The first was on April 11, 2006, just eight days after the accident, when she observed that he was moving slowly and with apparent great difficulty, grimacing and mincing. She also met with him about a month later, on May 12. At that time, he told her that he was trying to walk as much as possible, that he was taking painkillers but that he was not running. He said to her: "I don't jog - I power-walk".
50  As part of its examination of the circumstances, the defence retained an investigator to observe the activities of the plaintiff. That resulted in video recordings being made; those were tendered in evidence at this trial. Those recordings show the plaintiff, on three separate occasions, leaving his downtown place of business and travelling on foot to the area of his residence in West Vancouver.
51  The first of those recordings was made on May 4. It shows the plaintiff as he slowly jogged from his place of business to his residence. On the way, he stopped and did some moderate physical exercise including push-ups. The elapsed time from his departure from his place of work to his arrival at his home was approximately 70 minutes.
52  Another recording was made the day following, May 5. Again, it shows similar activity; the elapsed time was 70 minutes.
53  The third observation was conducted on May 11. Again, the plaintiff is shown essentially jogging from his place of work to his home. The additional exercise was done along the way in the same fashion.
54  At trial, the plaintiff was confronted with this evidence, as well as testimony he had provided in the course of an examination for discovery, at a time when he was unaware of the recordings having been made. At the examination, he stated under oath that he had eased into his running gradually following the motor vehicle accident and had started running the entire distance from his place of work to his home approximately five to six months after the motor vehicle accident. He said that, post-accident, the trip would take him in the order of two hours, which he said was about 45-60 minutes longer than it had taken prior to the injury. His evidence at the examination for discovery was that his time to make the trip, prior to the motor vehicle accident, was in the order of 60-70 minutes.
55  At trial his testimony was different. He said that before the motor vehicle accident, he had been able to do the run and the en route workout in 40 minutes.
56  Quite predictably, the apparent discrepancy between these activities and the manner in which the plaintiff had represented his injuries and their effects was the basis of some real dispute at trial.
57  As I understand the position of the plaintiff, he says that he forced himself to run these distances, even though he was in considerable pain, and even though it required him to use substantial amounts of painkilling medication, because he has a deep-seated commitment to physical exercise.
58  The plaintiff also attempts to address the concern by way of what seems to me to be something of a semantic distinction. He takes the position that he was not jogging but walking quickly.
59  The defendants adduced the evidence of an orthopaedic surgeon, Dr. Leith. His testimony was taken on a video deposition and that was tendered at trial. He had rendered three separate opinions, set out in report letters. The first was dated August 28, 2008. To prepare that opinion, Dr. Leith had examined the relevant medical records and performed an in-person assessment of the plaintiff on April 14, 2008. At that time, he was not aware of the video recordings. His conclusion, assuming that the plaintiff was asymptomatic prior to the accident and that, following the accident, he had pain affecting his left knee, left upper extremity and entire back, was as follows:
There is nothing to indicate any structural injury to the lumbosacral spine or the vertebra of this area. The ongoing symptoms are primarily musculoligamentous in nature and should resolve with appropriate conservative treatment. Prognosis for recovery is good based on the minor nature of the injuries sustained and the minor nature of the ongoing symptoms. There is no indication that there will be any long-term sequelae from this or requirement for any surgery. From a functional standpoint, Mr. Berenjian continues to work although with some low back symptoms, but this is not a significant problem based on the evaluation. The overall prognosis is good.
60  Dr. Leith was subsequently provided with copies of the video recordings of the plaintiff jogging on the three occasions described above. In light of that information, he provided a revised opinion, dated July 8, 2008, quite at variance with his original. Specifically, he said there:
The observation of this video is quite compelling after re-reviewing my assessment of April 14. 2008 and the opinion of that report. My Medical Legal Report to you opined that Mr. Berenjian had injuries to his left knee, left upper extremity and his entire back and the ongoing issue at the time of my evaluation was with respect to chronic low back pain.
As a result of my review of the surveillance video, my original opinion now becomes irrelevant. Being able to jog along the route that Mr. Berenjian was observed jogging without any sign of any pain or discomfort is not consistent with having any low back disability or problems. In particular, running for the length of time that he was running on a regular basis indicates that he did not have any injuries or disability. There is a large proportion of the population that would not be able to perform this length of run over the grades encountered even 100% healthy. Mr. Berenjian reported being injured during my evaluation and not being able to do this sort of activity without difficulty yet it is clear that he was very capable of this type of activity.
I would therefore conclude that Mr. Berenjian does not have any low back pain or disability as of the dates that he was jogging, which was within one month after the subject motor vehicle accident and at the present time, whatever symptoms he is complaining of are unrelated to the subject motor vehicle accident.
61  That opinion was further refined by way of a further supplemental opinion rendered on July 28, 2008. In that opinion, Dr. Leith assumed that the plaintiff's running activities had actually commenced on April 7, 2006, not May 4.
62  That refinement was premised on the proposition that the two defendants had observed the plaintiff running on April 7, in a manner similar to that depicted in the video recordings.
63  Operating from that assumption, Dr. Leith opined that the plaintiff would not have sustained any formidable injuries as a result of the motor vehicle accident on April 5, 2006, because if he had, he would not have been able to participate in the type of physical activity depicted.
64  The response of the plaintiff, as indicated, is that he was not running in the days immediately following the event. While he accepts that the activities depicted in the video recordings are accurate, he insists that he was doing so only in the face of great pain and with the assistance of pain suppression medication.
65  In support of that position, he relies upon subsequent follow-up medical opinions prepared by the family doctor, Dr. Mamacos, and the chiropractor, Dr. Wright. Both of those persons authored opinions in response to the revised subsequent opinion of Dr. Leith.
66  Dr. Mamacos essentially stands by his original report. He says as follows:
In the video he is seen to be exercising actively - does that mean he was never injured? A lot of healing can evolve in a month. A high pain threshold can motivate someone who loves to exercise to be active. He was seen "jogging" not sprinting.
My initial report showed bruising of his knee from the accident. He also had para-vertabral muscle spasm, etc-objective findings.
... I continue to support my findings that [he] sustained injuries after an MVA on April 16, 2006.
67  Similarly, Dr. Wright stands by her conclusion that the plaintiff sustained real injuries. She notes that it is her practice to advise patients who have been injured in accidents to continue to exercise to control symptoms and facilitate recovery. She says the ability to continue in a regular exercise routine does not preclude the existence of injury. She observes as well that she had the opportunity to examine and treat the plaintiff over the course of seven months, and that she observed objective evidence of injury and concluded his symptoms are the result of the accident.
68  I am concerned with the veracity of the plaintiff's claims regarding the extent, severity and effects of the injuries he suffered. The principal basis upon which the claim rests is his testimony, his description. There is not any notable objective evidence to support his assertions of the quite extensive nature of the consequences.
69  On the other side of the ledger are three significant factors:
Firstly, the evidence of the plaintiff's physical activities in the time following the accident is troubling. The jogging activities in which he was observed to be engaged and which have been proven by the video recordings, within a month of the event, are, in my view, quite strikingly at odds with the description he has provided of the extent of the effects of the injuries.
There are as well the observations made by the defendants, even before the video recorded activities. While they are not conclusively proven by photographic evidence, in view of the videos and, noting that both defendants have testified as to observations of the plaintiff having resumed some sort of jogging routine within weeks of the event, I must attribute some credence to their testimony on that matter.
In the result, I am driven to conclude that the plaintiff was able to engage in significant physical activity within a month of the accident.
Secondly, I find his evidence with respect to the issue problematic. His testimony at trial is not consistent with what he said at his examination for discovery. Those discrepancies are set out at para. 54 above.
I also find that the representations he made to the insurance adjuster are difficult to accept as truthful in light of the video evidence. His explanation at trial, that the discrepancies are more semantic than real, and that he was forcing himself to run, taking medication to be able to keep the pain within the limits of tolerability, is, in the totality of the circumstances, of some dubious believability.
The third factor is the nature of the event: the impact was quite minor. While that is not determinative - I accept that low-speed contact can, in some circumstances, result in injuries of real gravity - it is a factor that is entitled to some consideration.
70  In the final analysis, I have very serious doubts as to the truth and reliability of the plaintiff's description of the extent of the injuries and their impact upon him. My conclusion is that there was some soft tissue injury - bruising and discomfort - but it was fairly minor in that he was able to resume his running within a month. In view of that finding, while I accept there may have been some lingering residual discomfort, it would be of a fairly modest magnitude.
71  Similarly, as for his claims that his neck pain continued for 12 to 18 months, that the headaches persisted for six to eight months, and his complaint of low back pain, I find that he has not proven on a balance of probabilities that such injuries resulted in discomfort such as he describes. On the evidence, it was substantially less.
Damages
72  The plaintiff says that he suffered soft tissue injury to his neck and back which negatively impacted his life. He says the primary symptoms resolved over 18 months, and there was reducing intermittent low back discomfort since that time. In his submission, an appropriate award for non-pecuniary damages is <damage type = "other">$30,000</damage>.
73  In support of that submission, he cites four trial decisions of this Court:
In Parihar v. Allan, , the plaintiff suffered soft tissue injury to neck and back following two minor collisions; substantial recovery in the first nine months, with intermittent symptoms for an additional six months. At trial, three years post-accident, the plaintiff reported only occasional discomfort with activity. Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "other">$25,000</damage>.
In Kahlon v. Prasad, , the plaintiff sustained soft tissue injuries after a minor collision; no time missed from employment and the symptoms had fully resolved within 14 months. Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "other">$25,000</damage>.
In Krause v. Gill, , the plaintiff sustained soft tissue injuries to the neck and back; substantial recovery within the first six months and residual pain for an additional 12 months. At trial, three years post-accident, plaintiff reported ongoing residual discomfort. Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "other">$30,000</damage>.
In White v. Stonestreet, , the plaintiff sustained soft tissue injuries to neck, shoulder and back; significant improvement noted in the first six months and all symptoms had largely resolved within an 18 month period, with some continuing residual pain. Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "other">$35,000</damage>.
74  The submission of the defendants is that this plaintiff suffered minor soft tissue injuries of very limited duration. The defendants emphasize that the plaintiff is obliged to adduce "convincing evidence" "that his complaints of pain are true reflections of a continuing injury". They say that when the evidence is considered carefully and critically, the plaintiff has not proven more than a mild, transient injury.
75  The defendants make reference to a number of decisions which are characterized as addressing modest awards for modest injuries, with the submission that each of the cases in fact describe injuries more serious than those suffered by Mr. Berenjian:
In Kosko v. Collie,  (19 September 1995), New Westminster C911774 (S.C.), the plaintiff sustained a neck injury, resolved in four months. Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "other">$4,000</damage>.
In Cooper v. Torrance, , the plaintiff sustained injuries that were described as being severe for three weeks, moderate discomfort for approximately two months thereafter and some residual symptoms. Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "other">$2,500</damage>.
In Gill v. Mansour, , the plaintiff sustained mild soft tissue injuries which continued for a period of two months and resolved with only minor discomfort after. Non pecuniary damages: <damage type = "other">$3,000</damage>.
In Laboucane v. Paine, , the plaintiff suffered a modest injury that was partially disabling for approximately one month. Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "other">$3,000</damage>.
In Seto v. Ng, , the plaintiff suffered injury that was found to have lasted for four month duration. Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "other">$2,500</damage>.
In Dolha v. Heft, , the plaintiff sustained injuries that continued for a period of approximately six to nine months. Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "other">$7,000</damage>.
76  The defendants have also made reference to a decision of the Court of Appeal, Le v. Luz, . In that case, the Court set aside a jury verdict of <damage type = "other">$200</damage> for non-pecuniary damages and substituted a verdict of <damage type = "other">$2,000</damage>. In its decision, the Court noted that while there was no intention to set a floor or a benchmark for minor soft tissue injuries, an award of <damage type = "other">$2,000</damage> seemed appropriate in the circumstances.
77  It is obvious that the two very distinctly different submissions reflect quite different views of the magnitude and consequences of the injury. My conclusions are as set out in paragraphs 70 and 71 of these Reasons.
78  In my view, the appropriate award of non-pecuniary damages in this case is <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$4,000</damage>.
79  The plaintiff also seeks an award in respect of special damages. The amount sought is <damage type = "other">$940</damage>, which is the sum paid for therapy expenses. Although there was discussion as to interest costs incurred with respect to those fees, the plaintiff's submission does not seek recovery of any interest paid.
80  Given my findings as to the extent of the injuries, I am not satisfied that all of the fees paid for chiropractic care are reflective of a genuine need for those services. In the result, the plaintiff is entitled to recover <damage type = "special">$500</damage> for those costs, representing a portion only.
81  The defendants have advanced an argument with respect to a failure to mitigate. As I understand, that is put forward as an alternative, in the event the Court finds that the plaintiff suffered more than relatively minimal soft tissue injury that resolved quite straightforwardly. Given my finding, I see no purpose in addressing this submission.
Summary of Conclusions
82  The accident of April 5, <damage type = "other">2006</damage> was caused by the negligence of the defendant driver. In that accident, the plaintiff sustained injuries which entitle him to recover damages as follows:
 Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$4,000</damage> 
 Special damages: <damage type = "special">$ 500</damage> 
 Total: <damage type = "total">$4,500</damage> 
83  The plaintiff is also entitled to recover pre-judgment interest pursuant to the Court Order Interest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 79 in respect of the special damages.
84  In the absence of there being considerations of which I am unaware, the plaintiff shall recover his costs of this action. If necessary, arrangements may be made through New Westminster Supreme Court Scheduling to provide further submissions on that issue.
J.W. WILLIAMS J.
End of Document
Kumar v. Picco, [2007] B.C.J. No. 2463
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
B. Brown J.
Heard: June 5-8, 11-12 and 14, 2007.
Judgment: November 19, 2007.
Docket: S053725
Registry: Vancouver
[2007] B.C.J. No. 2463   |   37 C.B.R. (5th) 29   |   163 A.C.W.S. (3d) 154   |   2007 CarswellBC 2737   |   2007 BCSC 1669   |   53 C.C.L.T. (3d) 300
Between Gurdev Kumar, Plaintiff, and Louis T. Picco and Louis T. Picco, Inc., Defendants
(70 paras.)
Case Summary
Professional responsibility — Professions — Other — Accountants — Action by the plaintiff Kumar against the defendant accountant Picco for negligent misrepresentation allowed — The defendant prepared reports on a company the plaintiff planned to purchase — The reports failed to disclose substantial unpaid provincial sales tax owed by the company — The plaintiff lost his $250,000 deposit — The defendant's work fell below the standard expected of a chartered accountant — The defendant's liability was 25 per cent; the plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "total after">$62,500</damage> against the defendant.
Tort law — Negligence — Contributory negligence — Apportionment of liability — Action by the plaintiff Kumar against the defendant Picco for negligent misrepresentation allowed — The defendant, an accountant, was negligent in preparing reports on a company the plaintiff planned to purchase — The reports failed to disclose substantial unpaid provincial sales tax owed by the company — The defendant was liable for 25 per cent of the plaintiff's loss of his <damage type = "total">$250,000</damage> deposit; the plaintiff's contributory negligence was assessed at 75 per cent — The plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "total after">$62,500</damage> against the defendant.
Tort law — Fraud and misrepresentation — Negligent misrepresentation — Action by the plaintiff Kumar against the defendant Picco for negligent misrepresentation allowed — The defendant, an accountant, was negligent in preparing reports on a company the plaintiff planned to purchase — The reports failed to disclose substantial unpaid provincial sales tax owed by the company — The defendant was liable for 25 per cent of the plaintiff's loss of his $250,000 deposit; the plaintiff's contributory negligence was assessed at 75 per cent — The plaintiff was awarded $62,500 against the defendant.
Action by the plaintiff Kumar against the defendant Picco for negligent misrepresentation -- In 2004, the plaintiff sought to purchase a business; he decided to purchase a Hyundai dealership, owned by a company called Adriano's Performance Imports -- The defendant was API's accountant and sat in on negotiations -- He prepared review engagement reports for API for 2001 to 2004, he submitted reports for 2001 and 2003 to the plaintiff -- In October, 2004, the plaintiff paid a deposit of $250,000 directly to API for the purchase of the company -- He claimed that he relied upon the defendant's reports and his assurance that the deposit was adequately secured by a promissory note -- The purchase fell through when the plaintiff discovered that API owed <damage type = "other">$747,735</damage> in unpaid provincial sales tax, which was not included in the reports prepared by the defendant -- The plaintiff demanded return of his deposit in December, 2004 -- The deposit was not returned and API and its owner subsequently became bankrupt -- The defendant denied making the representations claimed, and argued that he thought the plaintiff's lawyer would advise against paying the deposit directly to API -- The defendant argued that the plaintiff was contributorily negligent -- HELD: Action allowed -- The defendant was liable for negligent misrepresentation with respect to the reports -- The plaintiff was owed a duty of care by the defendant, and had reasonably relied upon the reports in deciding to pay the deposit -- The defendant's work fell below the standard expected of a chartered accountant in failing to discover and report the unpaid PST -- The plaintiff had not established that the defendant made the representations claimed about the promissory note -- The plaintiff was assessed 75 per cent contributory negligence; the defendant was 25 per cent liable -- The plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "total after">$62,500</damage> against the defendant.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Negligence Act, s. 2(c)
Counsel
Counsel for the plaintiff: D.M. Smart.
Counsel for the defendants: D.B. Wende.
Reasons for Judgment
B. BROWN J.
1   Mr. Gurdev Kumar claims against Mr. Picco and his company, Louis T. Picco Inc. (for ease of reference, I will refer to Picco and his company collectively as Mr. Picco) for negligent misrepresentation. Mr. Kumar says that the review engagement reports prepared by Mr. Picco on the financial statements of the company which Mr. Kumar planned to purchase were prepared negligently. Mr. Kumar further says that Mr. Picco negligently advised him that the purchase deposit would be adequately secured by a promissory note from the company and its principal.
2  Mr. Kumar says that as a result of these negligent misrepresentations he paid a deposit of <damage type = "other">$250,000</damage> directly to the company, secured by a promissory note from the company and its principal. When the purchase deal fell apart, the company and the principal failed to return the deposit and subsequently became bankrupt. Mr. Kumar's entitlement to the return of the deposit is not disputed in this action. Mr. Kumar seeks damages from the defendants.
I. BACKGROUND
3  In 2004, Mr. Kumar was looking for a business to purchase. His family had been involved in the automobile industry in India and he was looking for an automobile dealership to purchase in the Vancouver area. Mr. Kumar learned that the Hyundai dealership in Burnaby may be for sale and he and his son, Karun Kumar, met with Mr. Pellegrino, the principal of the business. Mr. Pellegrino's company, Adriano's Performance Imports Inc. ("API") owned the operating business for the dealership. Another one of Mr. Pellegrino's companies, Kanwyn Enterprises Inc. owned the land and buildings.
4  In June 2004, Mr. Kumar and his son began meeting with Mr. Pellegrino with a view to purchasing both companies, thereby acquiring the dealership, the land and the buildings. The negotiations continued into November, 2004.
5  Mr. Picco attended several of the meetings with the Kumars and Mr. Pellegrino as API's accountant. Mr. Picco is a chartered accountant. API engaged Mr. Picco to issue review engagement reports on API's financial statements for the years ended August 31, 2001 to 2004 (the "Reports"). Mr. Pellegrino told the Kumars that he was not good with numbers, and referred them to Mr. Picco for questions about API's finances.
6  The Kumars say that in the course of the negotiations, Mr. Picco made various statements about the value of the business, such as telling them that people would be lined up to buy the business and producing calculations of the value of the business. They say that on or about September 16, 2004 Mr. Picco told Mr. Kumar that the purchase deposit of <damage type = "other">$250,000</damage> would be adequately secured by a promissory note from API and Mr. Pellegrino.
7  The Kumars say that they received the 2002 and 2003 Reports on September 7, 2004. They say that Mr. Picco brought the Reports to a meeting, took them from his briefcase and handed them to Mr. Pellegrino, who passed them to the Kumars. Mr. Kumar says that he relied on the Reports and on Mr. Picco's assurance that a promissory note would be adequate security when he paid the deposit directly to API in two instalments on September 28 and October 4, 2004.
8  Mr. Picco denies producing the Reports in the manner that the Kumars describe. He says that he thought that the Kumars had the Reports much earlier. He denies making the statements that the Kumars attribute to him, and particularly the comment regarding the security of the promissory notes. He says that Mr. Kumar had his own accountants and a lawyer to provide him with advice and that the lawyer had prepared draft purchase agreements which contemplated the deposit to be held in trust by the plaintiff's lawyer. Mr. Picco says that although Mr. Pellegrino asked Mr. Kumar to pay the deposit directly to API, Mr. Picco was confident that Mr. Kumar's lawyer would advise against this course. Mr. Picco says that he was surprised when he learned that Mr. Kumar had paid the deposit directly to API. Mr. Picco acknowledges that the Kumars were referring to the Reports in their negotiations with Mr. Pellegrino.
9  On approximately November 2, 2004, Mr. Kumar received the 2004 Reports. Neither the previously received Reports for 2003 and 2003 nor the newly received Reports for 2004 showed a liability of <damage type = "other">$747,735.62</damage> for unpaid provincial sales tax. This liability was assessed by the provincial government on September 29, 2003. Mr. Kumar says that had he known of this large liability, he would not have paid the deposit.
10  API and Mr. Pellegrino became bankrupt in 2005.
II. ISSUES
11  The issues are:
Are the defendants liable to the plaintiff for negligent misrepresentation on the Reports and statements regarding the adequacy of the promissory notes?
If so, was the plaintiff contributorily negligent?
What are the plaintiff's damages?
I will deal with each of these issues in turn.
III. NEGLIGENT MISREPRESENTATION
12  The plaintiff pleads this action as negligent misrepresentation. At the outset, it is useful to note that negligent misrepresentation and negligent misstatement are in fact the same cause of action and the two terms are often used interchangeably. As explained by Linden J.A. in R. v. Premakumaran, 2006 F.C.A. 213 para. 18:
Since the now-famous decision in Hedley Byrne & Co. v. Heller & Partners Ltd., [1963] 2 All E.R. 575 (U.K. H.L.), courts have recognized that an action in tort may lie, in appropriate circumstances, for damage caused by negligent misstatement or negligent misrepresentations.
13  In Queen v. Cognos Inc.,  para. 34, the Court identified five elements of negligent misrepresentation that a plaintiff must establish:
there must be a duty of care based on a special relationship between the representor and the representee;
the representation must be untrue, inaccurate or misleading;
the representor must have acted negligently in making the representation;
the representee must have relied in a reasonable manner on the negligent misrepresentation; and
the reliance must be detrimental to the representee in the sense that damages resulted.
14  In Hercules Management Ltd. v. Ernst & Young,  para. 22, 24 and para. 36-37, the Court elaborated on the "special relationship" required to found a duty of care:
22 ... In the context of a negligent misrepresentation action, then, deciding whether or not a prima facie duty of care exists necessitates an investigation into whether the defendant-representor and the plaintiff-representee can be said to be in a relationship of proximity or neighbourhood.
24 ... To my mind, proximity can be seen to inhere between a defendant-representor and a plaintiff-representee when two criteria relating to reliance may be said to exist on the facts: (a) the defendant ought reasonably to foresee that the plaintiff will rely on his or her representation; and (b) reliance by the plaintiff would, in the particular circumstances of the case, be reasonable. To use the term employed by my colleague, Iacobucci J., in Cognos, supra, at p. 110, the plaintiff and the defendant can be said to be in a "special relationship" whenever these two factors inhere.
[Emphasis added]
15  After a comprehensive analysis at para. 36-37 of the application of the Anns/Kamloops test to the tort of negligent misrepresentation, the Court restated its conclusions at para. 41:
The foregoing analysis should render the following points clear. A prima facie duty of care will arise on the part of a defendant in a negligent misrepresentation action when it can be said (a) that the defendant ought reasonably to have foreseen that the plaintiff would rely on his representation and (b) that reliance by the plaintiff, in the circumstances, would be reasonable. Even though, in the context of auditors' liability cases, such a duty will often (even if not always) be found to exist, the problem of indeterminate liability will frequently result in the duty being negated by the kinds of policy considerations already discussed. Where, however, indeterminate liability can be shown not to be a concern on the facts of a particular case, a duty of care will be found to exist. [Emphasis added]
16  Thus, the first Cognos element of negligent misrepresentation, a duty of care owed by the representor to the representee, has been elaborated on in Hercules Management to include elements of foreseeability and reasonableness of reliance. Therefore, to succeed in this case, Mr. Kumar has to prove the following elements:
Mr. Picco owed Mr. Kumar a duty of care based on a special relationship between them, such that:
Mr. Picco ought to have foreseen that the Mr. Kumar would rely on his representations; and
such reliance by Mr. Kumar on Mr. Picco's representations would be reasonable in the circumstances of this case.
Mr. Picco's representations were untrue, inaccurate, or misleading.
Mr. Picco was negligent in making these representations.
Mr. Kumar's reliance on Mr. Picco's negligent misrepresentations was reasonable.
Mr. Kumar has suffered damages because of his reliance on Mr. Picco's negligent misrepresentations.
17  Mr. Kumar argues that Mr. Picco has made two negligent misrepresentations:
the Reports; and
oral statements regarding the sufficiency of promissory notes given by API and Mr. Pellegrino to secure the deposit paid Mr. Kumar to API.
18  Because the nature of these representations is fundamentally different, each one has to be independently analyzed against the elements of negligent misrepresentation set out above. For the sake of convenience, I will first deal with the second representation.
A. Statements Regarding Promissory Notes
19  The defence argues that the alleged misrepresentation that the <damage type = "other">$250,000</damage> deposit would be adequately secured by two promissory notes from API and Mr. Pellegrino was not made and, in the alternatives, that the plaintiff could not reasonably rely upon such a representation when he knew it was not correct. The plaintiff had his own legal advisor who recommended that the deposit be paid into trust, not advanced to the company directly.
20  I do not accept the plaintiff's evidence that Mr. Picco told the Kumars that the deposit would be adequately secured by promissory note from API and Mr. Pellegrino. There would be no reason for him to do so. He knew that Mr. Kumar had his own lawyer and accountant, and would expect Mr. Kumar to take their advice. I do not believe that the Kumar's were intending to deceive the court, rather, I believe that they are mistaken: these statements were likely made by Mr. Pellegrino. Mr. Picco was present at the time, and the Kumars have mistakenly attributed the statements to him. I accept Mr. Picco's evidence that he did not make these statements.
21  As I found that these representations were not made by Mr. Picco, I do not need to analyze this particular allegation any further.
B. The Reports
1. Duty of Care
22  Mr. Kumar argues that he had a special relationship with Mr. Picco so that Mr. Picco owed him a duty of care. Mr. Kumar says that the following factors are sufficient to establish the special relationship and the duty of care:
Mr. Picco was aware that Mr. Kumar had the financial statements and was relying on them;
Mr. Picco was directly involved in several discussions regarding the financial statements and the value of API;
Mr. Picco explicitly or implicitly approved of Mr. Kumar using the financial statements;
Mr. Picco provided the statements to Mr. Pellegrino, who then immediately handed them to the Kumars without protest from Mr. Picco;
Mr. Picco knew that the Kumars were told that Mr. Picco was a qualified chartered accountant;
Mr. Picco made no attempt to restrict the use which the Kumars were making of the financial statements;
Mr. Picco was directly involved in discussions and negotiations regarding the value of the business and indicated or implied that he had sufficient knowledge about the business to comment on it and knew the value of the business;
Mr. Picco made statements directly to Mr. Kumar regarding the adequacy of promissory notes as security for the deposit; and
Mr. Picco made statements regarding the value of the business to the Kumars to the effect that there was a "line-up of people" ready to buy the business.
23  The defendants do not emphasize the duty of care in their argument. They say that Mr. Picco did not anticipate that the Reports would be used by Mr. Kumar for the purpose of deciding whether to make a deposit directly to API. Rather, Mr. Picco anticipated that Reports would be used by Mr. Kumar's own accountants, Morrow & Company, as part of their "due diligence" with respect to the purchase of API.
24  I am satisfied that Mr. Picco owed the plaintiff a duty of care. There is no issue with foreseeability of reliance because Mr. Picco actually knew that Mr. Kumar was using the Reports in his deliberations about buying the business. Mr. Picco attended meetings where the parties used the Reports in their negotiations.
25  Such reliance is clearly reasonable in the circumstances as Mr. Picco did not attempt to limit Mr. Kumar's use of the Reports or suggest that they were to be used only by Morrow & Company, Mr. Kumar's accountants. While the Reports were not initially prepared to assist Mr. Kumar in his deliberations, Mr. Picco knew that they were being used for that purpose and did not demur. There is, in these circumstances, no concern of indeterminate liability.
2. Were the Reports Untrue, Inaccurate, or Misleading
26  Having found a duty of care owed by Mr. Picco to Mr. Kumar, I have to now determine whether the representations, the Reports, were "untrue, inaccurate, or misleading".
27  The defence argues that the plaintiff has failed to prove that the Reports were "untrue, inaccurate or misleading" because there is no evidence that the PST balance shown on the 2002/2003 balance sheets was materially in error.
28  The defence further argues that the plaintiff must prove, on a balance of probabilities that a further review would have disclosed an incorrect PST balance at the end of the year. The defence says that the plaintiff could easily have established the amount of PST which was unpaid each month from September 2001 to January 2003 and has failed to do so.
29  The plaintiff does not have to establish the amount of PST owed to prove that the Reports were untrue, inaccurate or misleading. In the Reports, Mr. Picco provided an unqualified opinion on API's financial statements:
My review was made in accordance with generally accepted standards for review engagements and accordingly consisted primarily of enquiry, analytical procedures and discussion related to information supplied to me by the company.
...
Based on my review, nothing has come to my attention that causes me to believe that these financial statements are not, in all material respects, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
30  It is this assurance that Mr. Kumar relied on, which was at least inaccurate and misleading (as discussed below).
3. Were the Representations Negligently Made
31  To determine whether Mr. Picco was negligent in making these representations, I must determine if the Reports were prepared in accordance with the appropriate standard of care.
32  With respect to the standard of care, the plaintiff argues that the applicable professional standards are set out in the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants' Handbook (the "CICA Handbook"). The CICA Handbook requires an accountant, on a review engagement, to "perform a review, with a limited objective of assessing whether the information being reported on is plausible in the circumstances within the framework of appropriate criteria". The plaintiff says that Mr. Picco failed to determine whether the PST account reported by the API's management was "plausible".
33  The defence says that a professional is not held to a standard of perfection, but that he or she owes a duty of care to exercise the skill, care and diligence which may reasonably be expected of a professional of ordinary competence, measured by the professional standard of the time.
34  The defence says that Mr. Picco was retained to provide review engagement reports, not audit reports; meaning that the scope of the review is less and the level of assurance is lower than on an audit. A review engagement provides a negative assurance that nothing has come to the accountant's attention which causes him or her to believe that the financial statements are not in all material respects in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). A review engagement assesses whether the information being reported is plausible.
35  The plaintiff relies on the report of Brian Gardiner, CA, CFE. Mr. Gardiner is of the opinion that Mr. Picco did not meet the standard of care for a chartered accountant in the preparation of the Reports for 2001-2004. Mr. Gardiner relies on the standards applicable to review engagements in the CICA Handbook:
8100.15 Review standards
...
The public accountant should perform a review with the limited objective of assessing whether the information being reported on is plausible in the circumstances within the framework of appropriate criteria. Such a review should consist of:
enquiry, analytical procedures and discussion; and
public accountant's knowledge of the business carried on by the enterprise and the results of the enquiry, and analytical procedures and discussion cause him or her to doubt the plausibility of such information.
...
8100.17 Knowledge of the Entity's Business
To judge whether the information being reported on is plausible in the circumstances, the public accountant must be in a position to assess whether the information obtained during the course of the engagement is plausible. This requires sufficient [less than]knowledge[greater than] of the enterprise and the business in which it is involved to make intelligent enquiries and a reasonable assessment of responses and other information obtained.
8100.19 Review Procedures
A review consists primarily of:
making enquiries concerning financial, operating, contractual and other information, and considering responses that, in addition to oral responses, may take the form of listings, schedules or other documents;
applying analytical procedures such as comparing the current and prior period information and considering the reasonableness of financial and other inter-relationships. Analytical procedures performed during a review engagement would normally be less extensive than analytical procedures performed during an audit.
Having discussions with appropriate officials of the enterprise concerning information received and the information being reported on.
8100.20 When the public accountant doubts the plausibility of the information being reported on, sufficient additional or more extensive procedures would be carries out to resolve such doubt or confirm that a reservation is required.
36  Mr. Gardiner refers as well to the CICA review engagement checklist which asks "[h]ave sales, withholdings, GST and other taxes been considered?" In the checklist for each year's file Mr. Picco has answered 'Y' to this question, indicating that these items have been considered. Mr. Picco's files also contain copies of API's monthly self-assessment remittance forms for PST for 2002 and 2003; copies of the general ledger printout for account 2200, the PST payable account, for fiscal year ending August 31, 2002; and documents 1894 and 1895 where Mr. Picco recast fiscal activity recorded within general ledger account 2200. Mr. Gardiner concludes that Mr. Picco did not test the reasonableness of the PST account; he simply checked the last month's self-assessment against the accounts payable in the ledger. Mr. Gardiner opines that a simple reasonableness assessment of multiplying monthly sales by 7% PST (<damage type = "other">$700,000</damage> monthly sales x 7% PST= <damage type = "other">$49,000</damage>) would have demonstrated that API's monthly self-assessments of <damage type = "other">$3,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$6,000</damage> for PST were suspect, and this would have required further inquiry.
37  Mr. Gardiner further says that in 2002 Mr. Picco requested a printout of the detail for the general ledger account 2200 because he felt that the PST payable of <damage type = "other">$24,626.71</damage> was large. Mr. Gardiner notes that this PST liability would account for annual new car sales of <damage type = "other">$700,000</damage>, which the company was reporting on a monthly basis. Mr. Gardiner concludes that Mr. Picco's failure to consider that the sales figures reported by API did not accord with API's self-assessed PST liability and remittance was well below the standard expected of a chartered accountant.
38  The defence relies on the opinion of Catherine Greyell, CA. Ms. Greyell, too, refers to the CICA Handbook, including the following provisions:
8100.05 ... In this section, the word "plausible "is used in the sense of appearing to be worthy of belief based on the information obtained by the public accountant in connection with the review.
...
8299.02 The public accountant's enquiry, analytical procedures and discussion ... would normally include:
...
performing analytical procedures, which could include:
comparing the financial statements with those of the immediately preceding period and with any budgets for the current year; and
considering interrelationships of key elements of financial statements that would be expected tot conform to a predictable pattern based on the experience of the enterprise;
and obtaining explanations for the relationships and individual items that appear to be unusual.
39  Ms. Greyell opines:
In assessing the PST work completed by Mr. Picco, I draw my opinions not only from my past experience, but also from the standards established by my office ... no specific checklist or questions exist in our review of balances owed by a company with respect to PST. The PST payable balance is evaluated in a manner consistent with other accounts payable balances ... our work would typically include ... an explanation for the variance between the current period end balance and the prior period end balance and possibly (depending on the amount of the payable and/or the explanation for change in balance) a reconciliation to the company's remittance advice.
Ms. Greyell explained that this means checking the current year against the preceding year, and accepting the balance as plausible if there is no significant difference.
40  She continues:
Unless a professional accountant has specific concerns with respect to PST and the plausibility of information provided by management, he/she would not be expected to perform a reconciliation to sales on the PST remitted to the Ministry of Finance in a given year. In my opinion, given that the working paper files appear to suggest that nothing caused Mr. Picco to question the plausibility of the PST balance, I would not have expected Mr. Picco to perform a reconciliation of PST to sales in any of the years 2001 to 2004 inclusive.
41  I am satisfied that Mr. Picco's conduct fell below the standard of care required of a public accountant on a review engagement.
42  I adopt the reasoning of the Ontario Court of Appeal in Bloor Italian Gifts Limited v. Dixon  para. 27-31 (C.A.), a case very similar to this:
[27] To establish whether Dixon's conduct fell below the standard of care required of a public accountant on a review engagement, it is necessary to assess whether the applicable standard of care would have resulted in the discovery of the retail sales tax problem at issue. In determining the standard of care required of Dixon in these circumstances, the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants Handbook ("CICA Handbook") is of great assistance. The CICA Handbook sets out the professional standards that apply to accountants in conducting a review engagement. The CICA Handbook explains that a review engagement consists "primarily of enquiry, analytical procedures and discussion related to information supplied to the public accountant by the enterprise with the limited objective of assessing whether the information being reported on is plausible within the framework of appropriate criteria". 'Plausible' is defined as "appearing to be worthy of belief based on the information obtained by the public accountant in connection with the review". The CICA Handbook also stipulates that an accountant must apply "analytical procedures such as comparing the current and prior period information and considering the reasonableness of financial and other inter-relationships ... Explanations for relationships and individual items that appear to be unusual would be obtained by directing inquiries to appropriate personnel of the enterprise, the responses to which the public accountant is entitled to accept without examination of supporting evidence as long as such responses appear plausible."
[29] In addition, the CICA Handbook requires that the accountant has sufficient knowledge of the business to make intelligent inquiries and further that the accountant possess an appreciation of matters that could have a significant effect on the information being reported on. The accountant must also ensure proper supervision over any assistants he employs.
[30] A checklist prepared by the CICA includes the possible existence of any sales tax liability, assessed or not, as an item into which the accountant ought to inquire. Another checklist item requires the accountant and his staff to inquire about how sales tax and other taxes are determined and recorded.
[31] Professional standards of conduct such as those prescribed in the CICA Handbook provide a persuasive guide as to what constitutes the standard of reasonable care for a professional: See ter Neuzen v. Korn,  at 696-698.
43  The CICA Handbook establishes the standards of Mr. Picco's profession. It requires him to attain sufficient knowledge of the business in issue to be able to "make intelligent enquiries and a reasonable assessment of responses and other information obtained". In this case, that would involve knowledge of the volume of sales by API, and of the application of provincial sales tax to those sales. Within this framework, Mr. Picco is required to determine whether the information being reported on is plausible, i.e., appears to be worthy of belief. I accept the opinion of Mr. Gardiner that to assess the plausibility of the PST payable, Mr. Picco should have undertaken some rough calculation of its reasonableness. In the words of the trial judge in Bloor at para. 32:
... it would not have required much effort on the part of the accountant at year-end to multiply the sales shown on the financial statement by seven or eight percent, depending upon the year, and compare it with the sum of the twelve RST payments made during the year and thereby test the 'plausibility' or 'reasonableness' of the amount of taxes actually paid.
44  It would be difficult to determine that a number reported by the company is plausible without some assessment. Here, I accept Mr. Gardiner's opinion that Mr. Picco should have done a rough calculation by, at a minimum, multiplying sales by 7% to assess that plausibility of the reported PST payable. While this would likely be an overestimate, as there would be some sales where PST is not payable at all and other sales where tax is not payable on the full purchase price, it would be a rough calculation against which to measure the reported number.
45  Ms. Greyell's description of the practice of comparing one year end number against the preceding year end number is a short form for assessing plausibility: it assumes that if the last year end number is plausible, and this year end number is not significantly different, then it, too, is plausible. As a side note, I question whether this abbreviated route is really sufficient to meet the CICA Handbook requirement of assessing plausibility, as the accountant in this example takes no step to determine the plausibility of the number itself, he or she simply compares it to the preceding year. However, for the reasons that follow, I do not need to determine this point in this case.
46  In any event, the abbreviated form may not be appropriate in all circumstances, as Ms. Greyell acknowledged in cross-examination. Preparing the Report on the 2002 financial statement, Mr. Picco had specifically requested a printout of the PST payable account for that year. He reviewed it in detail, identifying remittances made each month from September 2001 to August 31, 2002 to address his concern that the PST payable reported by API had grown from <damage type = "other">$598</damage> on April 15, 2002 to <damage type = "other">$24,626.71</damage> on August 31, 2002. Mr. Picco noted on his working paper that "client did not make sufficient PST payments during the last 1/2 of the year and balance has grown steadily. ..." Ms. Greyell was questioned about Mr. Picco's review of this document. She acknowledged that Mr. Picco would know that API had gross monthly new vehicle sales of approximately <damage type = "other">$600,000</damage> per month and against those sales, the monthly PST payable/remittance reported by API would not be plausible and should have raised a doubt about its plausibility, which would in turn have required Mr. Picco to obtain an explanation from API. Ms. Greyell conceded that Mr. Picco, by failing to seek an explanation, failed to meet the standard for a reasonable public accountant. This concession also informs the 2003 review engagement. Taking Ms. Greyell's approach to plausibility, the failure to inquire in 2002 affects the 2003 Report as well: if the 2002 number cannot be said to be plausible, then it cannot be used as a benchmark for plausibility for 2003.
47  The PST payable set out in the 2002 (and 2003, as derived from 2002) financial statement was implausible. Mr. Picco should have inquired further and did not. The Social Service Tax Return Worksheet completed by API showed sales of <damage type = "other">$517,135.17</damage> in August 2003. If all were taxable, the PST to be remitted for that month would be <damage type = "other">$36,199.45</damage>. If half of those sales were taxable, <damage type = "other">$18,000</damage> should have been remitted. However, API reported tax collectable of <damage type = "other">$5,523.23</damage>. Thus, the magnitude of the inaccuracy of the PST payable may well have been in the order of <damage type = "other">$180,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$360,000</damage> per year for 2002 and 2003, using the August 2003 worksheet as a guide.
48  However, that is not really the issue. Mr. Kumar was not looking to Mr. Picco to tell him what the PST payable was, but to tell him that, after performing a review to appropriate standards, nothing had come to his attention that caused him to believe that the financial information being reported on was not in all material respects in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. It was the assurance that the Reports were "made in accordance with generally accepted standards for review engagements" and that "nothing has come to my attention that causes me to believe that these financial statements are not, in all material respects, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles", that was inaccurate and misleading and, I conclude, was negligently made.
49  Mr. Picco's review was not made in accordance with the generally accepted standards for review engagements. Generally accepted standards would have required him to investigate further, as Ms. Greyell properly conceded. Mr. Picco could not provide the unqualified opinion as he did: it was a negligent misrepresentation.
4. Reasonable Reliance
50  Having concluded that the Reports were negligent misrepresentations, I have to determine whether Mr. Kumar's reliance on the Reports in his decision to pay the deposit to API was reasonable.
51  Mr. Kumar says that he reasonably relied on the financial statements:
He had no reason to believe or suspect that the financial statements were inaccurate or improperly or negligently prepared.
He knew that Mr. Picco was a qualified chartered accountant and had been doing work for API for several years. It was reasonable for him to believe that Mr. Picco had detailed knowledge regarding API's financial circumstances.
The 2002/2003 financial statements indicated that API was making a modest profit, paying its liabilities in a timely way and was solvent.
Mr. Kumar was not relying on the financial statements for the purpose of determining a purchase price. Rather, he was relying on the statements to the extent of determining that the company had value for the purpose of making an advance payment of <damage type = "other">$250,000</damage>.
Mr. Picco had also made statements and provided a document which indicated that API had a value in excess of <damage type = "other">$2.8 million</damage>.
The Kumar's understood that Mr. Pellegrino was also the owner of Kanwyn, which owned the land and buildings, which had significant value. They had no information that Mr. Pellegrino was in personal financial difficulties.
The reasons offered by Picco and Pellegrino for a direct deposit to API were apparently legitimate: the payment would assist the company through a short-term cash flow problem and result in a more valuable asset on purchase.
52  The defence argues that Mr. Picco could not have reasonably foreseen that the plaintiff would rely on the Reports when deciding whether to pay the deposit directly to API and could not contemplate that the plaintiff would use the Reports for precisely this purpose.
53  The defence says that while Mr. Pellegrino asked the plaintiff to make the deposit directly to API, Mr. Picco believed that the plaintiff would not do so because he had independent legal advice. He did not anticipate that the Reports would be used as a basis for making a direct deposit to the vendor.
54  In my view, Mr. Kumar reasonably relied on the reports. Mr. Picco, an independent accountant, provided an opinion or comment on API's financial statements, and it is this opinion or comment that Mr. Kumar relied on. He was looking to Mr. Picco to assure him that the financial statements were in accordance with the GAAP. As the CICA Handbook notes in section 8100.06:
The negative assurance form of reporting used for review engagements ... informs the reader that, although sufficient evidence has not been obtained to enable the public accountant to express an audit opinion, a review has been completed in accordance with the standards of this Section and nothing has come to the attention of the public accountant that causes him or her to believe that the information being reported on is not, in all material respects, in accordance with appropriate criteria.
55  Such an assurance can only be given when the standards have been met (s. 8100.15). If the accountant is not able to give the assurance, he or she may issue the report with a reservation (s. 8100.32). No reservation was issued in this case and thus Mr. Kumar, as the reader of the Reports, could reasonably assume that API's financial statements were in fact reviewed in accordance with the generally accepted standards and that there was nothing amiss.
56  Mr. Picco's evidence may be summarized as "I never thought that you would give the deposit directly to the company, regardless of its financial condition; I thought that your lawyer would tell you not to do that." That issue is properly one of contributory negligence, not reasonable reliance.
57  On the facts before me, I am satisfied that it was reasonable for Mr. Kumar to rely on the Reports and the assurance they provided when advancing the deposit. He had no reason to believe that the Reports were not properly prepared. Mr. Picco had been the company's accountant for several years and attended the meetings between the Kumars and Mr. Pellegrino, provided information and answered questions about the finances of the business. Mr. Picco knew that Mr. Kumar was relying on the Reports in his deliberations regarding purchase of the business and should have anticipated that Mr. Kumar would look at the Reports as one of the factors in deciding whether to advance the deposit.
5. Were Damages Suffered Because of Reliance
58  Finally, it must be determined whether Mr. Kumar has actually suffered damages because of his reasonable reliance on Mr. Picco's negligent misrepresentations.
59  On the facts before me, I conclude that he did. Unless Mr. Kumar was satisfied as to the financial condition of the company (and the Reports would be at least one factor in this decision), it is unlikely that a deposit would be paid, whether in trust or otherwise.
IV. CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
60  The defence argues that if Mr. Picco is liable for negligent misrepresentation, then the court must apportion a significant amount of contributory fault to the plaintiff. The defence further argues that Mr. Pellegrino and API committed a fraud on both Mr. Picco and the plaintiff and a significant portion of fault must be borne by them.
61  The defence argues that the plaintiff was contributorily negligent in that he failed to follow his own solicitor's advice with respect to payment of the deposit by providing the money directly to Mr. Pellegrino. In this respect, Mr. Kumar has acknowledged that his actions were "foolish".
62  The defence relies on Leischner v. West Kootenay  (C.A.). The defence argues that pursuant to s. 2(c) of the Negligence Act, a plaintiff who contributed to his own loss can only obtain several judgments against the defendants liable for his loss, in proportion to that for which the defendant was at fault. The defence suggests that 90% of the fault should be attributed to Mr. Pellegrino and the balance of 10% divided by the plaintiff and the defendants.
63  The plaintiff argues that making a simple error in judgment is not the same as contributory negligence, relying on Hongkong Bank of Can. v. Touche Ross & Co.  para. 18-19 and para. 50 (C.A.):
18 ... But, though the trial judge did not deal in specific terms with the question of whether the bank was careless in failing to call for an audited statement as of 30th June 1982 before authorizing the loan, he did deal with that question in general terms as part of an overall consideration of the bank's conduct in making the loan, in these words [p. 6]:
There is certainly some validity in the criticisms levelled against the plaintiff in making the loan. In my view, even without hindsight, there was an error in judgment in extending the line of credit. However, I find insufficient lack of care and prudence on the part of the bank to justify a finding of negligence in making this loan.
19 On the questions of fact arising from the evidence there is, in my opinion, no mistake in the conception of the evidence by the trial judge such that this court would be justified in reconsidering the evidence and concluding that the authorization of the loan by the bank on the basis of the material before it was a failure to take reasonable care for its own safety. That being so, the trial judge's conclusion that the bank was not contributorily negligent in relation to the authorization of the loan must stand.
...
50 But when the victim has no reason to know or foresee that he is or may be in danger from the negligent act of another, the perpetrator of the negligent act cannot complain that the victim did not take reasonable care. The respondent had no reason before April 1983 to doubt the accuracy of the audit. Once the respondent knew of the undisclosed liability, it did have a duty to take reasonable care in handling the loan but no argument was made to us that the respondent's conduct after it learned of the negligence of the appellant was imprudent.
[Emphasis added]
64  The plaintiff says that there may be contributory negligence where the plaintiff has suffered loss as a result of a misrepresentation, but that would be an unusual case. I cannot say whether this case is an unusual one or not, as I conclude that Mr. Kumar was clearly contributorily negligent.
65  However, I am not able to accede to the defence's argument regarding attribution of fault to Mr. Pellegrino. It may well be that Mr. Pellegrino was fraudulent, as the defence argues, and intentionally hid the PST assessment and liability from Mr. Picco. However, I have no evidence on this issue, beyond the PST assessment document and the bankruptcy of API. Any conclusion that I would reach would be speculative. Mr. Pellegrino and API are not parties to this action. I have no idea what they may have to say on the issue. It may be that API never received the assessment, or that the assessment was disputed, or that Mr. Pellegrino himself had no knowledge of the matter. In the absence of evidence, I cannot make findings on this issue.
66  Secondly, Mr. Kumar was not relying on Mr. Pellegrino to advise him of the company's finances, he was relying on Mr. Picco's Reports. While Mr. Picco may have a claim against Mr. Pellegrino/API for failing to advise him of the PST assessment, as the retainer agreement required Mr. Pellegrino/API to do, that failure did not cause Mr. Kumar's loss. Had Mr. Picco performed the review engagement to the appropriate standards of care, it is reasonable to conclude that the Reports would not have been issued without reservation, as they were.
67  I accept the defendant's argument that Mr. Kumar was contributorily negligent. Mr. Kumar had been involved in several other business transactions in Canada. Mr. Robinson was his solicitor and had acted for him on these other matters. As Mr. Kumar knew, in each of those transactions the deposit was held in trust until the transaction completed. Mr. Robinson was also acting for Mr. Kumar on this transaction. Mr. Robinson prepared draft agreements for this transaction which contemplated that the deposit would be held in his trust account until completion. Mr. Kumar knew that the deposit would be protected if it was held by Mr. Robinson. Mr. Kumar and his son discussed the matter and Mr. Kumar decided to pay the deposit directly to API. On his instruction, Kuran Kumar revised the draft agreement, changing the deposit payment from a deposit to Mr. Robinson's trust account to direct payment to API. Mr. Kumar and Mr. Pellegrino signed the revised agreement. Mr. Kumar did not seek advice from Mr. Robinson or from his accountants regarding this change.
68  In my view, the majority of the fault for Mr. Kumar's loss lies with him. He did not act appropriately to protect his own interests. I assess 75% of the fault to Mr. Kumar and 25% to Mr. Picco.
V. DAMAGES
69  The damages in this case are quite straight forward. Mr. Kumar advanced a deposit of <damage type = "other">$250,000</damage>. He demanded return of the money in December, 2004. The money was not returned. Mr. Pellegrino and API both became bankrupt. There is no real prospect of recovery of the deposit in the bankruptcy. Therefore, Mr. Kumar's loss is <damage type = "total">$250,000</damage> and Mr. Picco is liable for 25% of this loss.
VI. CONCLUSION
70  In conclusion, Mr. Kumar will have judgment against the defendants for <damage type = "total after">$62,500</damage>, interest, and costs at scale B, unless there are matters of which I am not aware.
B. BROWN J.
End of Document
Gillespie v. Yellow Cab Co., [2014] B.C.J. No. 2332
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
New Westminster, British Columbia
T.C. Armstrong J.
Heard: January 6-8 and 14-15, 2014.
Judgment: September 17, 2014.
Docket: M131580
Registry: New Westminster
[2014] B.C.J. No. 2332   |
Between Michael Gillespie, Plaintiff, and Yellow Cab Company Ltd., Ali Dowlatabadi, Jiaqiang Yu, Defendants
(317 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Head injuries — Brain damage — Headaches — Psychological injuries — Arising subsequent to incident — Action by Gillespie to recover damages for personal injuries sustained in two motor vehicle accidents allowed — Gillespie's head struck windshield in first accident — Court accepted family doctor's diagnosis of mild brain injury, ongoing headaches and anxiety — Gillespie awarded non-pecuniary damages of $85,000, $160,000 for past income loss, $140,000 for lost earning capacity, $2,500 for future care costs and $918 for special damages.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Retroactive loss of income — Non-pecuniary loss — Action by Gillespie to recover damages for personal injuries sustained in two motor vehicle accidents allowed — Gillespie's head struck windshield in first accident — Court accepted family doctor's diagnosis of mild brain injury, ongoing headaches and anxiety — Gillespie awarded non-pecuniary damages of $85,000, $160,000 for past income loss, $140,000 for lost earning capacity, $2,500 for future care costs and $918 for special damages.
Action by Gillespie seeking damages for personal injuries sustained in two motor vehicle accidents. Liability for both accidents was admitted by the defendants. The first accident took place in December 2009. Gillespie was proceeding through an intersection when his vehicle was struck by a taxi that failed to stop for a stop sign, propelling Gillespie's vehicle into the path of an oncoming cube truck. Gillespie struck his head against his vehicle's windshield, cracking the glass and causing lacerations to his head. In January 2010, Gillespie was rear-ended while stopped at a red light. The impact was minor, but Gillespie claimed it aggravated his neck and back for the next seven to 10 days. Following the accidents, Gillespie was left with soft tissue injuries, an inner ear injury, and compromised brain functioning. He claimed he had memory problems that resulted in his work activities. He claimed he had headaches constantly for six months and that he continued to use pain medication for back pain and headaches. He denied experiencing anxiety prior to the accidents, despite a record of one doctor's visit for anxiety issues. He claimed he experienced anxiety after the accidents. His wife confirmed Gillespie's personality changed for the worse after the accidents. His family doctor relied on a neurologist's report in diagnosing a mild brain injury. The neurologist was not called to provide evidence. The family doctor opined that Gillespie would continue to suffer from the effects of the first accident indefinitely. A defence expert opined that Gillespie's cognitive impairment was attributable to metabolic syndrome rather than a brain injury. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 Gillespie was awarded <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$85,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages, <damage type = "past wage loss">$160,000</damage> for past income loss, <damage type = "future wage loss">$140,000</damage> for lost earning capacity, <damage type = "future care">$2,500</damage> for future care costs and <damage type = "special">$918</damage> in special damages. Despite its shortcomings, the evidence of the family doctor was accepted as the best indicator of Gillespie's actual condition and its cause. The defence expert's opinion was given little weight because he did not understand the severity of the first accident. Inconsistencies in Gillespie's evidence were attributed to his injuries, not an attempt to misrepresent them. The court accepted he sustained a mild traumatic brain injury, inner ear dysfunction, headaches, and neck and back pain. He developed anxiety and his mood changed, impacting his daily life and work. His evidence about being limited in the work he could perform was not specific enough to convince the court of the figures he suggested for past and future income loss, so the court estimated those figures. His future care costs and special damages were limited to headache pain medication.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Insurance (Vehicle) Act,
Counsel
Counsel for Plaintiff: D.W. Darychuk, Q.C. and K. Deane-Cloutier.
Counsel for Defendants: N. Gill.
Reasons for Judgment
T.C. ARMSTRONG J.
Introduction
1  This action concerns Mr. Gillespie's claim for damages for injuries he alleges were caused by motor vehicle accidents in December 2009 (the first accident) and January 2010 (the second accident).
2  On December 1, 2009, the plaintiff was driving a 2002 Honda Civic through an intersection in Vancouver when a taxi failed to stop at a stop sign and struck his vehicle. The plaintiff's car then collided with a cube van coming from the opposite direction, and he hit his head against his car's windshield. The impact cracked the glass, and the glass lacerated his head.
3  On January 22, 2010, the plaintiff was involved in a minor rear-end collision when he was stopped at a red light. He claims this incident aggravated his neck and back "a bit", and the symptoms lasted seven to 10 days.
4  The controversy in this case turns largely on the nature and extent of the injury to Mr. Gillespie's head from the first accident.
5  The defendants admit liability for both accidents and this trial concerned the extent of Mr. Gillespie's injuries and an assessment of damages that may have been caused by each accident.
6  The plaintiff seeks the following damages for injuries in both accidents:
non-pecuniary: $85,000 - $110,000 ($1,000 to $3,000 of that claim is for the second collision);
past income loss: $241,452;
future loss of earning capacity: $285,997;
special damages: $600 - $800; and
future care costs: $1,642 - $3,285.
The Issues
7  After the accidents the plaintiff presented with various minor soft tissue injuries, an injury to his inner ear, and symptoms indicating his brain function was compromised. There are two principal issues and two preliminary issues to be addressed in this trial. The findings on the secondary issues will impact the findings on the principal issues so I will discuss them first:
Principal issues:
After the accidents, did the plaintiff suffer symptoms from metabolic syndrome unrelated to the accidents or did he suffer a mild traumatic brain injury caused by the first accident?
What is the proper measure of the plaintiff's damages if:
the plaintiff suffered a mild traumatic brain injury, an inner ear injury and soft tissue injuries to his neck and back in the first accident and exacerbated by the second accident? or
the plaintiff did not suffer a brain injury in the first accident but suffered neck and back injuries resulting from both accidents?
Secondary issues:
Should I draw an adverse inference against the plaintiff for failing to call Dr. Foti?
How much weight should I give the expert medical opinion?
The Facts
Before the Accident
8  Mr. Gillespie is a 65-year-old married father of two adult children.
9  He lives with his wife in Burnaby, BC.
10  After graduating from high school, he attended Vancouver City College.
11  Sometime after finishing at City College, he entered the flooring business, and in 1984, opened his own business specializing in niche flooring products. He spent most of the next 16 years operating that business, but in approximately 2000, Mr. Gillespie and his wife were forced into bankruptcy because that business failed.
12  He then obtained employment selling "sun rooms" in BC and Alberta; he worked in that role until 2004.
13  In 2004, the plaintiff and his wife moved to Burnaby to facilitate her education at BCIT. She pursued a course in human relations and eventually obtained employment with the Genome Sciences Centre.
14  Between September 2004 and January 2005, the plaintiff was unemployed. In 2005 he took a position with AAA Flooring (AAA), a local flooring company. His role was to prepare quotes for prospective flooring customers, order materials and oversee installation work. After one and a half years, he became dissatisfied with his employer's work practices which he believed were adversely affecting his health.
15  He then began his own flooring proprietorship, and in January 2008, he incorporated a company to carry on the business. His plan was to accumulate sufficient funds in the company's retained earnings so he and his wife could retire to the Okanagan in approximately three years.
16  He testified that before the first accident he did not have any health problems and was not seeing a physician for specific concerns. He did have high cholesterol, but he had no history of concussion, hypertension, dizziness, concentration problems, and/or memory problems.
17  When working for his previous employer AAA, he experienced some difficulties with the sleep difficulties and saw a physician for advice in 2006; he related these physical problems with stress at his work with AAA. He did not receive any prescription medication to deal with sleep and these problems resolved after he left his employment.
18  He testified that he was not aware of having anxiety before the first accident, and he consulted his doctor only about sleep problems. He did not remember a meeting with his doctor in 2006 when his anxiety was discussed; there is a record of such a discussion but the author of the notes did not testify. Nevertheless, between 2006 and December 2009, he did not have any anxiety or sleep issues.
19  His current business is restricted to commercial and institutional flooring supply work. When he began this business, Mr. Gillespie was responsible for all aspects of the work, including bookkeeping, record-keeping, reviewing proposals, measuring, and preparing quotations. When his bids were successful, he ordered product from suppliers, rented trucks to transport material to job sites, attended to the unloading of materials, engaged sub-contract installers and reviewed the work after completion. He also attended work sites to correct deficiencies. He does not do the physical work himself; he engages subcontractors to do all flooring installations.
20  He performs his record keeping and book work manually. He prepares quotes and invoices for the business, and he uses a bookkeeper and a chartered accountant to complete his financial statements and reporting to Canada Revenue.
21  His typical work day starts at 5:30 am and concludes around 4:30 pm.
22  Mrs. Gillespie confirmed that prior to the accident the plaintiff was rarely sick and had no specific health concerns.
23  Regarding physical activities before the accident, the plaintiff and his wife regularly walked together. He used an elliptical trainer and treadmill and occasionally played golf.
The Accident
24  When the first collision happened, Mr. Gillespie was travelling in his 2002 Honda Civic with one of his flooring installers, Will Pingot. They were traveling westbound on 33rd Avenue when the defendant's taxi emerged from Culloden Avenue and struck the side of his vehicle, causing it to collide with a cube van.
25  The airbags deployed, and airbag powder filled the vehicle. The plaintiff's head struck and shattered the upper left side of the front windshield.
26  After the collision, Mr. Pingot asked the plaintiff what had happened; he replied that the airbag was going off. Once they were outside of the vehicle, Mr. Pingot then observed the plaintiff talking to someone on the telephone. He told the plaintiff to call 911 and Mr. Gillespie placed that call. Mr. Gillespie was walking around and sitting along the road. Mr. Gillespie requested Mr. Pingot to drive him to the Burnaby General Hospital. He left the plaintiff at the hospital.
Immediately after the Accident
27  Mr. Gillespie testified in chief that after the accident:
he felt woozy but did not have pain;
his head was bleeding;
his lip was cut;
he got out of the vehicle and walked around;
the damage to his vehicle and the taxi was considerable, and his vehicle was unrepairable;
a neighbor provided a towel for his head;
the fire department and an ambulance arrived;
the ambulance staff asked if he had lost consciousness;
he declined the ambulance staff's invitation to be taken to Vancouver General Hospital;
his passenger Mr. Pingot, drove him to Burnaby General Hospital;
he waited at Burnaby General Hospital, and they tested his blood pressure and his eyes and asked him about dizziness;
he did not remember any unconsciousness;
hospital staff repaired the hanging skin cut to his forehead;
he was dizzy and nauseous;
he had back, knee and ankle pain;
he had a headache on the left side;
he does not recall how long he remained at Burnaby General Hospital or when he left the hospital, but he recalls being advised not to go to sleep;
his wife and daughter arrived at Burnaby General Hospital and took him home;
he eventually went to sleep; and
his general and low back pain worsened.
28  When the plaintiff was cross-examined, he said he could recall very little of what transpired at the Burnaby General Hospital; he could not recall being dizzy, nauseous or experiencing headaches. When presented with his discovery evidence he acknowledged there were differences between his testimony at trial and his responses at the discovery. I will address that point below.
29  He could not remember how long he was at the accident scene or whether he had pain in his head. However, he specifically recalled that during the night, his dizziness, low back and neck pain worsened, although he did not recall having nausea. He denied the suggestion that his headaches and dizziness occurred only in the morning.
30  The plaintiff was not certain, but he believed that the next day (the visit was actually two days later on December 3) he saw his family doctor, Dr. Levis, who advised him to "take it easy". He testified that he told his doctor that his headaches were sharper over the eye area, that he had neck pain at the base of his skull, and that he had low back, leg, and ankle pain.
31  He was asked about his failure to mention his headaches to Dr. Levis on December 2 or 3, and he denied the suggestion that his headaches did not begin until the morning of December 3. And he framed his answers about dizziness as "to the best of my recollection I had dizziness." When Mr. Gillespie resorted to the phrase "to the best of my recollection" I inferred that he does not have a clear memory of such events and was doing his best to reconstruct what he thinks occurred.
32  He said he followed his doctor's advice, but during the following week his headaches worsened, and he became concerned about the prospects of a head injury.
33  After approximately one week, he obtained a CT scan at Royal Columbian Hospital; he was told that nothing was seriously wrong with his head.
34  His headaches were unrelenting for the first six months after the first accident.
35  He said there was a little bit of dizziness for one week after the first accident. He had low back pain for about one month, and the pain in his neck and right leg also improved within a month.
36  In the days after the accident, he was feeling some pressure to return to work, but he was finding it hard to concentrate and believed he was making mistakes. He would add numbers incorrectly and would reverse numbers even when using a calculator.
37  He does not recall telling his wife about these problems at the time, but he does recall Dr. Levis advising him to go to physiotherapy. He attended physiotherapy as prescribed.
38  The gash on his forehead healed within four to five months although a scar remains on his forehead.
39  Other than physiotherapy the only treatment he received was medication for his headaches and sleep issues.
40  Mr. Gillespie did not tell Dr. Levis that he had experienced anxiety before the accident and she did not review his medical records from before the accident, until well after writing her report. He was confronted with his family doctor's 2006 notes which reflected a comment that for two years he had been waking in the middle of the night feeling anxious. He testified that he had not had any pre-accident anxiety issues. He said he had been able to begin his new business in 2006 and had made a success of the business without problems relating to anxiety.
The Second Accident
41  On January 22, 2010, Mr. Gillespie was involved in the second accident. This rear-end collision caused a jolt that aggravated his neck and back pain. The changes to those symptoms lasted seven to 10 days. From then on, his neck problems came and went, but long drives aggravated this condition. If he turned his head sharply, he also experienced pain.
Life after the Accidents
42  Although Mr. Gillespie's low back discomfort improved, if he sits for prolonged periods, his back will ache.
43  His neck and right leg were not painful after the first one month.
44  He had some dizziness for approximately one week after the first accident, but that symptom has resolved.
45  In the first month after the first accident, his headaches worsened; they were constant and fluctuated from being bearable to unbelievably sharp pains during the first six months post-accident. His eyes became strained if he read too much.
46  During the first month after the first accident Mr. Gillespie did not stop working at any time. He does not remember ever refraining from driving and could not be sure if he reduced his number of hours worked. He said it was hard to concentrate and he was making mistakes in calculations.
47  He was having memory difficulties.
48  He was prescribed Tylenol 3's, but he found they made him dozy. He started taking over-the-counter medications and has used six to eight Tylenol pills per day ever since. He currently takes two in the morning, two during the day, and two at night. The Tylenol costs approximately $180 per year.
49  His wife's medical plan covered the prescription medication, and he paid for the over-the-counter drugs (Tylenol) personally.
50  He was referred to the Fraser Health Concussion Clinic on April 14, 2010 where he was advised:
to reduce the number of tasks he focused on at any one time;
to stop work if he became confused;
to avoid television, radio and noisy places;
to use sticky notes for reminders; and
to focus on smaller jobs rather than larger jobs that may involve multiple trades in confined areas (this strategy has resulted in him not doing large jobs).
51  In cross-examination, Mr. Gillespie said he had no memory of the visit to the concussion clinic. He said he went to the clinic because of problems with work, anxiety and memory, but he then said he could not remember which problems actually led to his attendance at the clinic. He did not remember the interview at the clinic or that he told them he was functioning at 90% of his physical, emotional, and cognitive capacity at the time. He also could not remember the questionnaire given to him at the clinic nor his responses. The concussion clinic recommended that he return for a second session; he declined.
52  He tried to maintain his routine but felt he was becoming confused; this confusion prompted him to stop work. When he worked on more than one project at a time, he felt his anxiety build up. He avoids using television and radios when he is working.
53  BC Housing was one of his clients, and he typically enjoyed a good working relationship with that institution. They often did work in single room occupancy buildings. However following the accidents, Mr. Gillespie claimed he had to stop taking on that type of work because the job sites were too confusing for him.
54  Mr. Gillespie claims that his memory has deteriorated since the accident. He said he forgets fax numbers, phone numbers, conversations and other details. He has word finding difficulties and transposes numbers when doing work related calculations. He sometimes forgets street names and numbers.
55  He makes sticky notes to remind himself of tasks that need to be done. He has a book where he lists the things he needs for specific jobs, and he has increased the amount of detail he keeps in his workbooks.
56  In May 2011, his family doctor referred him to a neurologist, Dr. Foti. The doctor did some concussion testing, and Mr. Gillespie said he was truthful in his answers to Dr. Foti. When he saw Dr. Foti he did not mention any word-finding difficulties and believed his day-to-day memory was reasonable. Nevertheless he currently asserts that his memory is not as good as it was before the accident.
57  The concussion clinic recommended that he adjust his activity level to avoid multi-tasking. After he made this change he found it easier to cope with his anxiety and headaches, although he feels that he was turning down too much business because of the limitations on his working ability.
58  Initially, he stopped taking on new work when he became confused. His anxiety over minor issues increased. The anxiety occurs mostly when he is in bed and subsides after he arises in the morning.
59  Before the accident he did not have anxiety, but now he feels that he is on the edge. He said that the things that cause anxiety are of no consequence, but he continues to go over and over issues that cause him to become anxious. Working on more than one task at a time seems to contribute to his anxiety.
60  He makes dinner for his wife at approximately 7:00 pm. He retires each night around 9:15 pm and gets up at 5:00 am. His wife does not go to bed until 11:00 pm. He said his intimate life with his wife has dropped off since the accidents. He avoids noisy places such as shopping malls.
61  Dr. Foti prescribed antidepressant medications for Mr. Gillespie; he said amitriptyline has improved his sleep quality, but he continues to have word-finding problems and difficulty recalling names, places, and street names.
62  He said his injuries do not affect his energy levels unless the symptoms become bad, and then he may sit in the dark until he improves. He finds that noisy places such as shopping malls bother him. Large job sites may have as many as seven trades in confined areas which seem to increase his level of stress. As a result, he stopped taking on large projects.
63  By October 2011 Mr. Gillespie was feeling better with improved energy. He could not recall if his condition at the time of trial was changed from how he felt in October 2011. He confirmed that at his examination for discovery of December 12, 2013 he was feeling better and that his cognitive functioning had improved since seeing Dr. Foti.
64  He testified that before the accident he could do a "takeoff", or a quote, in 30 to 60 minutes for a $10,000 project. The same work now takes between 90 and 180 minutes. He forces himself to redo takeoffs as many as three times because of his problems with numbers. If he reproduces a single quotation three times and the results are in the same range, Mr. Gillespie is satisfied with the quotation he has created.
65  He testifed that the risk of making an error on a $100,000 job is beyond his tolerance. On a projoct of that size, a $10,000 mistake would be very serious and too great a risk for him. He testified that he lost $25,000 on a project at UBC due to an installation error. There was no corroborating evidence detailing this loss. He has no memory of losing work due to his poor memory but claimed to have lost work (from Syd Pagliara) due to problems with a customer over pricing. He stopped responding to Syd's projects but continues to work for Syd's son.
66  He said that the reason he accepts only smaller jobs is due to his health; when defendants counsel suggested it was not because of the accident, he answered "I cannot say yes or no". But he believes the larger jobs exacerbate his symptoms.
67  Large jobs take weeks or months to complete whereas the smaller projects can be finished within one or two days.
68  Currently, he gets upset more easily than before the accident and is short with people. He has been told that his tone is aggressive, and he thinks he is slow to admit mistakes when at work and at home. He believes these personality changes and being easily upset has cost him business relationships.
69  He is concerned about changes in his memory; but he is unable to usefully compare his current memory with his capacity before the accident.
70  His current memory problems have not changed from the date of the first accident: they include difficulty in word-finding, reversing numbers, leaving pots on the stove (he has done it twice), needing to make notes, and being anxious about making errors in his project quotations. He believed these symptoms came on at the time of the accident, but he cannot be specific. He complains of ongoing headaches which develop throughout his day; he uses Tylenol medication to ameliorate the symptoms.
71  He was cross-examined about his memory problems. As an example, he had testified at his discovery that his memory difficulties were limited to numbers and names whereas at trial he claimed a much broader range of memory problems. He acknowledged that he could not remember his conversation with Mr. Pingot at the accident scene.
72  Both he and his wife testified that his personality has changed since the accidents. He is more aggressive now and is more easily upset by people and events. She said he has become mean and aggressive at times and can be rude to others. She has observed the plaintiff's difficulty in sleeping since the accident. She said there is a lot of tossing and turning and moaning when he is asleep.
73  Since the accident he uncharacteristically raises his voice in conversation and has become defensive.
74  She has observed difficulties with his memory. He now forgets conversations and appears to struggle with quotations and calculations. She said he leaves the fridge door open, his keys in the front door and leaves taps running and pots on the stove. She said that they talk about their plans on one night and he will have forgotten their discussions the next night.
75  He confirmed that does not experience anxiety during the day; it is confined to early mornings. He is able to enjoy holidays without interference with memory difficulties.
76  He plans to continue taking two holidays each year and to scale back his work until retirement.
77  He said that his injuries have resulted in lower business profits since the accident. In his first full year after the accident (fiscal 2011) his company net profit was $77,726, whereas the 2010 profit was $143,299. In 2012 he decided to put more effort into the projects and his business and the profit increased to $166,921. In 2012 when he was not feeling well, was anxious and was sleeping less; the income nonetheless rose by $90,000 for 2012.
78  He took 20 days off in May 2012 and three weeks off in October 2012 for vacation; these vacations occurred in fiscal 2013. When he returned from his holidays he felt better and was less anxious.
79  Since May 1, 2013 he has increased his workload and described his fiscal 2014 business as good. He said there is a lot of work and more pressure.
80  He could only guess that work now takes double the time he thought was required before the accident. He is no longer confident in giving the type of "rough estimates" he provided before the accident.
81  Mr. Gillespie acknowledged under cross-examination that the last job he turned down due to his injuries and the type of work involved was in August 2011. He testified that he is turning down larger jobs but produced no records of job turn-down despite knowing that in this case he was making a claim for past and future income loss based on those lost jobs.
82  He testified that his wife will retire from her position in three years and that they would like to return to the Okanagan to live. He said he wanted to accumulate between $700,000 and $800,000 in retained earnings in his company to be able to fund his retirement.
83  In sum, Mr. Gillespie's main complaint is that his memory and cognitive function were seriously compromised by the injury to his head and adversely affect his competitiveness in the flooring business.
Medical Evidence
84  The plaintiff relied on the April 30, 2013 written opinion of his family doctor, Dr. Nicole Levis. Dr. Levis appeared at trial and was cross-examined.
85  The plaintiff also relied on the August 28, 2013 written opinion evidence of Dr. E. David, a specialist in Otolaryngology who was initially retained by the defendants. He was not cross-examined.
86  The defendants relied on the September 12, 2013 written opinion of Dr. Andrew Eisen, a neurologist, who appeared at trial and was cross-examined.
Dr. Levis
87  Dr. Levis's written opinions included the following:
Mr. Gillespie was injured in the first accident and diagnosed with a mild traumatic head injury concussion with ongoing post-concussion symptoms. He experiences chronic headaches, sleep disturbances, anxiety, and persistent cognitive impairments;
The collision caused Mr. Gillespie's injuries. He did not have a pre-accident condition that made him more susceptible to injury nor was she aware of pre-existing injuries or conditions. Therefore, she attributed his symptoms to the accident;
His pre-accident diagnosis of hypertension proteinuria did not impact the accident related injuries;
Mr. Gillespie has a vocational disability. His injuries have rendered him able to take on 50% of his previous projects or workload. He is not accepting the larger, complex projects and only accepting the smaller ones. He experiences headaches throughout his work day and makes errors resulting in him rechecking his work more often than before. These impairments are likely to persist into the future;
Mr. Gillespie's injuries affect his recreational, social, household, and daily activities. He has sleep difficulties and anxiety. He does not work out or use an elliptical machine as he did before the collision. He is more irritable and anxious when planning or decision-making;
Mr. Gillespie is likely to require ongoing Tylenol and amitriptyline. Massage therapy may be helpful. Neuropsychological testing might help regarding his cognitive difficulties; and
Mr. Gillespie's symptoms have continued for three years and four months, and complete recovery is unlikely; the symptoms will persist into the future.
88  In cross-examination, Dr. Levis said she relied on Dr. Foti's opinion, i.e., that the plaintiff suffered a mild traumatic brain injury, when preparing her opinion.
89  When Dr. Levis first saw Mr. Gillespie on December 3, 2009, he described to her the sequence of events leading to the collision, the collision itself, the spinning of his car and striking another truck, the airbag deployment, the impact of his head on the windshield and his upper lip on the steering wheel. He said he did not lose consciousness. He was able to describe the events at Burnaby General Hospital, including the repair to his forehead laceration. He also described his headaches, body aches and poor sleep.
90  Dr. Levis's initial opinion was that Mr. Gillespie had a whiplash injury and forehead cut. She did not note any altered state of consciousness. But she opined that his concussion injury had lasted from then to now without improvement, and that the pattern and duration of his head injury is not in the usual course. She said an altered state of consciousness may be indicated if a person is dazed, confused or has mental fog and was suffering decreased memory.
91  Dr. Levis reported that Mr. Gillespie "stated he awoke on December 3, 2009 with a headache and body aches and poor sleep". Mr. Gillespie also complained of bilateral neck pain and rotation with low back pain, but had no blurry vision, tinnitus or dizziness. He did not report having a headache between December 1 and 3, 2009.
92  When Dr. Levis met Mr. Gillespie on December 21, 2009, he described some poor short-term memory, reversing numbers, intermittent headaches relieved by Tylenol, intermittent dizziness, and difficulty with word-finding. Her impression at that visit was post-concussion syndrome, and she referred him for a neurological consultation.
93  Mr. Gillespie told Dr. Levis that his intermittent headaches and sleep disturbances continued into June 2010. By August 30, 2010, he said he was doing well; he was working more hours and experiencing fewer headaches. But he told her that the insomnia was continuing, that he was using Zopiclone to help, and that if he failed to take it, he would wake at 3:00 am.
94  In her examinations of the plaintiff, Dr. Levis did not inquire about any history he might have had with anxiety or sleep issues. She missed reviewing his earlier records where those symptoms had been disclosed previously to his doctor.
Dr. David
95  Dr. David opined that it is likely Mr. Gillespie suffered a post-traumatic left inner ear otolith dysfunction. The mechanism for this injury was a direct impact, acoustic trauma from airbag deployment and explosive forces associated with airbag deployment.
96  Dr. David's opinion was based on an objective balance test that confirmed Mr. Gillespie had an inner ear dysfunction.
97  Dr. David opined that Mr. Gillespie's day-to-day activities are not currently limited due to the deficit because he has a compensatory mechanism that is activated.
98  Dr. David opined that the there is a possibility that the compensatory mechanism can be overridden, and his imbalance may become noticeable. This deficit is also in his opinion a contraindication to Mr. Gillespie working at elevations or around machinery or doing any commercial driving.
99  However, Dr. David opined that Mr. Gillespie achieved complete compensation (but not resolution) for this deficit.
Dr. Eisen
100  Dr. Eisen opined that the plaintiff suffered a whiplash type injury with no neurological deficits or radiological fractures. He reports that both motor vehicle accidents were "of mild nature". He did not believe the plaintiff suffered a mild traumatic brain injury even though he had a forehead laceration.
101  Regarding the second accident, he said this very mild collision aggravated the whiplash symptoms of the neck and back from the first accident. Those symptoms rapidly settled and were no longer a concern. He said that the plaintiff's cognitive symptoms did not commence until after the second accident. He learned from the plaintiff that his cognitive symptoms persisted and possibly worsened. He noted Dr. Foti's comment confirming his mild cognitive dysfunction one year after the accidents. Those deficits were not apparent to him at the time of his examination. Dr. Eisen seems to have accepted that the deficits were evident until January 22, 2011. He has not considered Dr. Levis' comments that cognitive deficits were apparent by December 21, 2009.
102  Dr. Eisen observed that the plaintiff did not stop work; rather he curtailed his work intensity due to memory impairment and lack of concentration. Dr. Eisen opined that Mr. Gillespie's headaches were not cervicogenic and related to the accident; he believed they were related to small vessel disease of the brain called concomitant of metabolic syndrome predating the accident.
103  A head MRI would have been helpful in detecting indications of small vessel disease of the brain, but I note that an MRI did was not done in this case.
104  Dr. Eisen also observed that there was no evidence of Mr. Gillespie experiencing amnesia as was noted by Dr. Foti.
105  Dr. Eisen said that the plaintiff had all four components of metabolic syndrome: abdominal obesity, hypertension, impaired glucose metabolism, and disordered lipid profile. The presence of metabolic syndrome increases the risk of cognitive impairment.
Parties' Submissions
Plaintiff
106  Mr. Gillespie contends that the first accident resulted in cuts to his head, neck, left shoulder, low back, knee and ankle pain. He developed severe, ongoing headaches.
107  Mr. Gillespie claims he suffered a mild traumatic brain injury on the basis of Dr. Levis's evidence. He claims that the injury resulted from his head hitting the car windshield, and his ongoing symptoms resulted from that blow to his head.
108  Mr. Gillespie felt dazed and woozy after the collision.
109  Mr. Gillespie argues that this post-accident conduct demonstrates the injuries of which he now complains result from damage to his brain. When his wife met him at the hospital, Mr. Gillespie was unsteady on his feet and very agitated. She could not have a coherent conversation with him because he did not make sense; he was going off on tangents. He was anxious and wanting to go home. Once at home he was disoriented, agitated and distressed. In short, his behavior was erratic.
110  Dr. Levis confirmed that mild traumatic brain injuries can be diagnosed when a loss of consciousness or alteration of consciousness occurs. An alteration of consciousness means a change in mental status; it could include being woozy, dazed, in a mental fog, confused or experiencing memory loss (I will pause to note that, curiously, this detail was not included in her written report and was only elicited in cross-examination).
111  Mr. Gillespie contends that the symptoms continuing from the date of the accident justify an award for past loss of income and that the amount of those damages should be estimated.
112  Mr. Gillespie also contends that future income loss has been proven because he suffers from cognitive difficulties that require him to triple check his work. He also takes longer to do his estimates, and the stresses and risks associated with large complex jobs have made it untenable for him to accept those types of projects.
113  Before the accident, Mr. Gillespie targeted accumulating retained earnings in his company between $700,000 and $800,000 as the amount needed to retire. Before the accident, his company had $36,472 in retained earnings. In 2010, that account rose to $106,827, and by 2013, it rose to $353,628.
114  Mr. Gillespie claims that if retained earnings continue to increase at $143,000 per year (the amount of increase in the fiscal year ending April 30, 2010) he would have reached his goal by working full time until 2015. These projections translate into a future income loss of $640,000. He calculates his actual post-accident loss for the years ending April 30, 2011, 2012 or 2013 at $309,832 and $103,277 per year. This amount is $59,131 less than his pre-accident capacity.
115  If Mr. Gillespie had continued to work to age 70, his loss of capacity would be $285,997. The plaintiff invited the Court to consider the capital asset approach outlined in Brown v. Golaiy .
116  Mr. Gillespie contends that he is overall less capable of earning income from all types of employment; less marketable or attractive to prospective employers, less able to take advantage of all job opportunities, and less valuable to himself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive market.
117  Mr. Gillespie's claims for special damages are limited to extra strength Tylenol and over-the-counter medication. He takes six to eight tablets per night at a cost of $15 for every 200 tablets. This claim is between $600 - $800.
118  Regarding cost of future care, Mr. Gillespie claims that extra-strength Tylenol will cost between $1,642 and $3,285 depending on his life expectancy.
119  Mr. Gillespie argues that Dr. Eisen's opinion should not be accepted because of his errors in assessing the plaintiff's pre-accident risk factors for metabolic syndrome. He argues that Dr. Eisen erred in concluding that Mr. Gillespie met the criteria for abdominal obesity, untreated hypertension or atherogenic dyslipidemia.
Defendants
120  The defendants argue that the plaintiff suffered mild soft tissue injuries in the December 2009 accident and no injuries from the January 2010 collision.
121  They argue that the plaintiff's evidence was inconsistent between his examination in chief and cross-examination and his discovery testimony. They argue that I should attribute a dishonest motive to the plaintiff and reject his evidence as not credible or reliable.
122  The defendants argue that usual indicia of a traumatic brain injury include evidence of an altered state of consciousness or unconsciousness shortly after injury. The defendants argue that no evidence demonstrates that Mr. Gillespie was experiencing either unconsciousness or altered consciousness in the moments after the collision. Therefore, Dr. Levis erred when she concluded that Mr. Gillespie suffered a brain injury. Indeed, Dr. Levis confirmed that headaches and dizziness are nonspecific symptoms that do not necessarily lead to the conclusion of traumatic brain injury.
123  The defendants contended that Dr. Levis's evidence should not be given great weight. They argue that she is a part-time practitioner who sees an average of five cases of concussion injury per year, and most of those concussions are sports related injuries. She is not a trained neurologist; rather she functions as a patient advocate accepting the complaints as stated without questioning the veracity or reliability of those complaints.
124  The defendants argue that the plaintiff exaggerated the impact of his cognitive deficits on his daily living.
125  The defendants argue that the plaintiff lacked credibility and reliability in his testimony at trial. Although Dr. Levis reported that the plaintiff was a good historian, his testimony at trial was quite inconsistent and suggests that he did not have a good memory.
126  In direct evidence, Mr. Gillespie gave a detailed account of the events leading up to the collision and what transpired at the scene of the accident. He said he got out of the vehicle, walked around, and noticed that the fire department and ambulance arrived. Someone gave him a towel for his head. The ambulance attendants wanted to take him to hospital; he declined in favor of going to Burnaby Hospital with his passenger.
127  At his September 21, 2011 examination for discovery he was asked about the fire department and police attendance at the scene. He responded:
147Q So I understand that the fire department and the police attended the scene; is that correct?
 A  Yes. I believe the first person there was a fire department person. Again, I am just going on what I have been told about it. And then the police arrived and a fire - - and ambulance. Where emergency response vehicle or... 
148Q Do you not recall the fire department or ambulance attending?
 A  Not really. I have very little memory of that at all. I remember the - - being in the emergency response vehicle, but I believe that the first person there was a fire person in his - - in a fire vehicle, not a big fire truck, but I guess like a fire car. And again, I think I am taking most of this from related stories. 
128  Under cross-examination he said that: he did not remember pain to his head or forehead; did not remember being dizzy, nauseous, or suffering back pain, neck pain or headache when he was at Burnaby Hospital.
129  Dr. Levis' records indicate that on December 3, 2009 the plaintiff reported no dizziness and headaches that began the morning of December 3. He did not deny saying this to Dr. Levis but insisted that his headaches and dizziness had begun the day of the accident. The defendants stressed that the discrepancy in the plaintiff's testimony in chief outlining his complaints when he arrived at Burnaby General Hospital and his discovery evidence wherein he lacked a memory of these details ought to erode my confidence in his reliability and credibility.
130  The defendants also contend that the plaintiff's report to Dr. Foti in August 2011 and October 2011 that, his day to day memory was reasonable, his geographic sense and concentration were reasonable, and he occasionally lost his train of thought, are against his complaint of more serious memory and concentration problems. They argue that his report to the concussion clinic that he was 90% recovered as of April 15, 2010 demonstrates the unreliability of his trial testimony.
131  They contend that, in the absence of corroborating evidence to support his claims and given his self-confessed poor memory, Mr. Gillespie has not proven that he suffered a concussion-type injury that impaired his ability to function and altered his personality.
Applicable Law
Expert Evidence
132  Analyzing conflicting medical opinions requires scrutinizing the facts underlying those opinions.
133  Mazur v. Lucas,  is apposite to the issues in this case. It concerned hearsay evidence that experts relied on in forming opinions. At paras. 38-40, the Court said:
 [38]  In Cunningham v. Slubowski,  (CanLII), , Madam Justice MacKenzie (now A.C.J.), described the proper use of clinical records, not otherwise in evidence, in the context of a ruling on the admissibility of those records. Although her ruling pertained to the admissibility of clinical records, part of her ruling is nevertheless apt to this case. She said at para. 13: 
 [13]  Even had the plaintiff complied with s. 42 of the Evidence Act to make the clinical records admissible as business records, the consulting letters to Dr. Abelman of the three specialists to whom he referred the plaintiff amount to expert opinions which are inadmissible because of failure to comply with Rule 40A: F.(K.E.) v. Daoust  (BC CA),  (C.A.); McTavish v. MacGillivray. The proper use of the clinical records is thus very limited in this case: they can be used by the defendants on cross-examination of the plaintiff, by Dr. Abelman himself as notes to refresh his memory while giving evidence at trial, or in cross-examination of Dr. Abelman on his expert report with respect to the foundation for his opinion. The latter use would include reference to the plaintiff's statements and the opinion of other specialists, but not for proof of the content of those statements and opinions. 
 [39]  As Watt J. observed after canvassing the jurisprudence on hearsay-based opinions in R. v. Palma,  (Ont. S.C.J.), there has not been "any reasoned departure from the principles stated and reiterated by the Supreme Court of Canada over the better part of three decades". This treatment of hearsay contained in an expert opinion as relevant to weight rather than admissibility has also been commented upon favourably by leading Canadian scholars in the field of evidence (see David Paciocco and L. Steusser, The Law of Evidence, 5th ed. (Toronto: Irwin Law, 2008) at 211-213; Alan Bryant et al., The Law of Evidence in Canada, 3rd ed. (Markham, Ont.: LexisNexis, 2009) at 838-849). Likewise, the notion of a relaxed hearsay rule in the context of expert evidence is reflected in the model civil jury instructions: R. Dean Wilson et al. CIVJI: Civil Jury Instructions, loose-leaf at s.<check-sect/> 4.20.8, which reads: 
Second, where [the expert witness] gave (his/ her) opinion, it was based (entirely/in part) on statements made to (him/her) by others who were not called to give evidence in this trial, such as [specify].
Because the person(s) who made these statements did not give evidence before you, the opinion of [the expert witness] is founded (entirely/in part) on hearsay evidence.
Normally, hearsay evidence is not admissible for any purpose, but in the case of an expert, the rule is not quite so strict. You may examine this hearsay evidence for the purpose of deciding the weight you will give the opinion of [the expert witness]. You cannot regard that hearsay evidence as evidence of the truth of what is alleged to have been said. However you may use it for the purpose of assessing the weight of the evidence of [the expert witness].
 [40]  From these authorities, I would summarize the law on this question as to the admissibility of expert reports containing hearsay evidence as follows: 
* An expert witness may rely on a variety of sources and resources in opining on the question posed to him. These may include his own intellectual resources, observations or tests, as well as his review of other experts' observations and opinions, research and treatises, information from others -- this list is not exhaustive. (See Bryant, The Law of Evidence in Canada, at 834-835)
* An expert may rely on hearsay. One common example in a personal injury context would be the observations of a radiologist contained in an x-ray report. Another physician may consider it unnecessary to view the actual x-ray himself, preferring to rely on the radiologist's report.
* The weight the trier of fact ultimately places on the opinion of the expert may depend on the degree to which the underlying assumptions have been proven by other admissible evidence. The weight of the expert opinion may also depend on the reliability of the hearsay, where that hearsay is not proven by other admissible evidence. Where the hearsay evidence (such as the opinion of other physicians) is an accepted means of decision making within that expert's expertise, the hearsay may have greater reliability.
* The correct judicial response to the question of the admissibility of hearsay evidence in an expert opinion is not to withdraw the evidence from the trier of fact unless, of course, there are some other factors at play such that it will be prejudicial to one party, but rather to address the weight of the opinion and the reliability of the hearsay in an appropriate self-instruction or instruction to a jury.
[Emphasis added.]
134  And at paras. 34-36, the Court addressed R. v. Lavallee,  and R. v. Abbey, , namely in examining the issue of where an expert relies on information for which no admissible evidence exists:
34  Madam Justice Wilson extracted the following principles from Abbey (at 893): 
An expert opinion is admissible if relevant, even if it is based on second-hand evidence.
This second-hand evidence (hearsay) is admissible to show the information on which the expert opinion is based, not as evidence going to the existence of the facts on which the opinion is based.
Where the psychiatric evidence is comprised of hearsay evidence, the problem is the weight to be attributed to the opinion.
Before any weight can be given to an expert's opinion, the facts upon which the opinion is based must be found to exist.
And she concluded (at 896-897):
In my view, as long as there is some admissible evidence to establish the foundation for the expert's opinion, the trial judge cannot subsequently instruct the jury to completely ignore the testimony. The judge must, of course, warn the jury that the more the expert relies on facts not proved in evidence the less weight the jury may attribute to the opinion...
Where the factual basis of an expert's opinion is a melange of admissible and inadmissible evidence the duty of the trial judge is to caution the jury that the weight attributable to the expert testimony is directly related to the amount and quality of admissible evidence on which it relies.
 [35]  Mr. Justice Sopinka concurred with Wilson J. in the result in Lavallee, but made some clarifying remarks which are relevant to the present appeal. In his view, the four propositions from Abbey concerning the admissibility and weight of expert opinion evidence may yield a result which is self-contradictory (at 898-899): 
The combined effect of numbers 1, 3 and 4 is that an expert opinion relevant in the abstract to a material issue in a trial but based entirely on unproven hearsay (e.g., from the mouth of the accused, as in Abbey) is admissible but entitled to no weight whatsoever. The question that arises is how any evidence can be admissible and yet entitled to no weight. As one commentator has pointed out, an expert opinion based entirely on unproven hearsay must, if anything, be inadmissible by reason of irrelevance, since the facts underlying the expert opinion are the only connection between the opinion and the case: see Wardle, "R. v. Abbey and Psychiatric Opinion Evidence: Requiring the Accused to Testify" (1984), 17 Ottawa L. Rev. 116, at pp. 122-23.
 [36]  To resolve the contradiction, he drew a practical distinction between evidence that an expert obtains and acts upon within the scope of his or her expertise and evidence that an expert obtains from a party to litigation touching a matter directly in issue (at 899-900): 
In the former instance, an expert arrives at an opinion on the basis of forms of enquiry and practice that are accepted means of decision within that expertise. A physician, for example, daily determines questions of immense importance on the basis of the observations of colleagues, often in the form of second- or third-hand hearsay. For a court to accord no weight to, or to exclude, this sort of professional judgment, arrived at in accordance with sound medical practices, would be to ignore the strong circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness that surround it, and would be, in my view, contrary to the approach this Court has taken to the analysis of hearsay evidence in general, exemplified in Ares v. Venner,  (SCC),  (SCC), . In R. v. Jordan  (B.C.C.A.), a case concerning an expert's evaluation of the chemical composition of an alleged heroin specimen, Anderson J.A. held, and I respectfully agree, that Abbey does not apply in such circumstances. (See also R. v. Zundel  (ON CA),  (ON CA),  (Ont. C.A.), at p. 52, where the court recognized an expert opinion based upon evidence "... of a general nature which is widely used and acknowledged as reliable by experts in that field.")
Where, however, the information upon which an expert forms his or her opinion comes from the mouth of a party to the litigation, or from any other source that is inherently suspect, a court ought to require independent proof of that information. The lack of such proof will, consistent with Abbey, has a direct effect on the weight to be given to the opinion, perhaps to the vanishing point. But it must be recognized that it will only be very rarely that an expert's opinion is entirely based upon such information, with no independent proof of any of it. Where an expert's opinion is based in part upon suspect information and in part upon either admitted facts or facts sought to be proved, the matter is purely one of weight.
[Emphasis added.]
Credibility and Reliability of Evidence
135  In Bradshaw v. Stenner,  at para. 186, Dillon J. analyzed the factors to be considered when assessing credibility:
[186] Credibility involves an assessment of the trustworthiness of a witness' testimony based upon the veracity or sincerity of a witness and the accuracy of the evidence that the witness provides (Raymond v. Bosanquet (Township) ,  (S.C.C.)). The art of assessment involves examination of various factors such as the ability and opportunity to observe events, the firmness of his memory, the ability to resist the influence of interest to modify his recollection, whether the witness' evidence harmonizes with independent evidence that has been accepted, whether the witness changes his testimony during direct and cross-examination, whether the witness' testimony seems unreasonable, impossible, or unlikely, whether a witness has a motive to lie, and the demeanour of a witness generally (Wallace v. Davis,  (Ont. H.C.); Faryna v. Chorny,  (B.C.C.A.) [Faryna]; R. v. S.(R.D.),  at para.128 (S.C.C.)). Ultimately, the validity of the evidence depends on whether the evidence is consistent with the probabilities affecting the case as a whole and shown to be in existence at the time (Faryna at para. 356).
136  In Andrusko v. Alexander, , Fitzpatrick J. said at para. 49:
If the plaintiff's account of his or her change in physical, mental, and or emotional state as a result of the accident is not convincing, then the hypothesis upon which any expert opinions rest will be undermined: Samuel v. Chrysler Credit Canada Ltd., , at paras. 15, 49-50.
Causation
137  A plaintiff must establish on a balance of probabilities that the defendant's negligence caused or materially contributed to an injury. The defendant's negligence need not be the sole cause of the injury so long as it is part of the cause beyond the de minimus range. Causation need not be determined by scientific precision: Athey v. Leonati,  at paras. 13-17 [Athey].
138  The primary test for causation asks: but-for the defendant's negligence, would the plaintiff have suffered the injury? The "but-for" test recognizes that compensation for negligent conduct should only be made where a substantial connection between the injury and the defendant's conduct is present: Resurfice Corp. v. Hanke,  at paras. 21-23.
139  Causation must be established on a balance of probabilities before damages are assessed. As McLachlin C.J.C. said in Blackwater v. Plint,  at para. 78:
... Even though there may be several tortious and non-tortious causes of injury, so long as the defendant's act is a cause of the plaintiff's damage, the defendant is fully liable for that damage. The rules of damages then consider what the original position of the plaintiff would have been. The governing principle is that the defendant need not put the plaintiff in a better position than his original position and should not compensate the plaintiff for any damages he would have suffered anyway: [Athey v. Leonati].
140  The basic goal of tort law to restore an injured person to the position he or she would have been if not for the defendant's negligence, no better or worse. The tortfeasor must take his victim as they are when the injury happens, even if the plaintiff's injuries are more severe than they would be for a normal person (the thin skull rule). However, the defendant need not compensate the plaintiff for any debilitating effects of a pre-existing condition which the plaintiff would have experienced anyway (the crumbling skull rule): Athey at paras. 32-35.
Non-Pecuniary Damages
141  Non-pecuniary damages are awarded to compensate injured people for pain, suffering, loss of enjoyment of life and loss of amenities. Compensation must be fair and reasonable to reflect the impact of injuries on the past and future lives of victims of the negligence of others.
142  Fairness is measured against awards made in comparable cases but although those cases are helpful, they only represent a reference for the assessment of the facts unique to each person.
143  In Stapley v. Hejslet, , Kirkpatrick J.A. outlined some of the important factors to be considered when assessing non-pecuniary damages at para. 46:
The inexhaustive list of common factors cited in Boyd [Boyd v. Harris, ] that influence an award of non-pecuniary damages includes:
age of the plaintiff;
nature of the injury;
severity and duration of pain;
disability;
emotional suffering; and
loss or impairment of life;
I would add the following factors, although they may arguably be subsumed in the above list:
impairment of family, marital and social relationships;
impairment of physical and mental abilities;
loss of lifestyle; and
the plaintiff's stoicism (as a factor that should not, generally speaking, penalize the plaintiff: Giang v. Clayton, ).
144  The measure of non-pecuniary damages must reflect the injured person's personal experiences in coping with injuries and their consequences, and the plaintiff's ability to articulate that experience: Dilello v. Montgomery,  at para. 25 [Dilello].
Past Income Loss
145  Compensation for past loss of earning capacity is to be based on what the plaintiff would have, not could have, earned but for the injury that was sustained: Rowe v. Bobell Express Ltd.,  at para. 30; M.B. v. British Columbia, .
146  In Smith v. Knudsen,  the Court said at para. 29:
That instruction accurately reflects the distinction made in the case authorities between proof of actual events and proof of future or hypothetical events. What would have happened in the past but for the injury is no more "knowable" than what will happen in the future and therefore it is appropriate to assess the likelihood of hypothetical and future events rather than applying the balance of probabilities test that is applied with respect to past actual events.
147  The burden of proof of actual past events is on a balance of probabilities. An assessment of loss of both past and future earning capacity involves consideration of hypothetical events. The plaintiff is not required to prove these hypothetical events on a balance of probabilities. The future or hypothetical possibility will be taken into consideration as long as it is a real and substantial possibility and not mere speculation: Drodge v. Kozak,  at para. 148 [Drodge].
148  This analysis involves estimating and not calculating the loss: Steward v. Berezen,  at para. 7.
Loss of Future Earning Capacity
149  A claim for loss of future earning capacity raises two key questions: 1) has the plaintiff's earning capacity been impaired by his or her injuries; and, 2) if the plaintiff is impaired, what compensation should be awarded for the resulting financial harm that will accrue over time? The assessment of loss must be based on the evidence, and not an application of a purely mathematical calculation. The appropriate means of assessment will vary from case to case: Brown v. Golaiy,  (S.C.) [Brown]; Pallos v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia,  (S.C.) [Pallos]; Pett v. Pett, .
150  The assessment of damages is also a matter of judgment, not calculation: Rosvold v. Dunlop,  at para. 18.
151  As much as possible, the plaintiff should be put in the position he would have been in but for the injuries caused by the defendant's negligence: Lines v. W & D Logging Co. Ltd.,  at para. 185.
152  The essential task of the Court is to compare the likely future of the plaintiff's working life if the accident had not happened with the plaintiff's likely future working life after the accident: Gregory v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia,  at para. 32.
153  In Perren v. Lalari,  [Perren], the Court described the plaintiff's burden of proof to succeed in this claim at para. 32:
A plaintiff must always prove, as was noted by Donald J.A. in Steward, by Bauman J. in Chang, and by Tysoe J.A. in Romanchych, that there is a real and substantial possibility of a future event leading to an income loss. If the plaintiff discharges that burden of proof, then depending upon the facts of the case, the plaintiff may prove the quantification of that loss of earning capacity, either on an earnings approach, as in Steenblok, or a capital asset approach, as in Brown. The former approach will be more useful when the loss is more easily measurable, as it was in Steenblok. The latter approach will be more useful when the loss is not as easily measurable, as in Pallos and Romanchych. A plaintiff may indeed be able to prove that there is a substantial possibility of a future loss of income despite having returned to his or her usual employment. That was the case in both Pallos and Parypa. But, as Donald J.A. said in Steward, an inability to perform an occupation that is not a realistic alternative occupation is not proof of a future loss.
154  The two possible approaches to assessment of loss of future earning capacity are the "earnings approach" and the "capital asset approach": Brown.
155  The capital asset approach involves considering factors such as:
whether the plaintiff has been rendered less capable overall of earning income from all types of employment;
is less marketable or attractive as a potential employee;
has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities that might otherwise have been open; and,
is less valuable to herself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market: Brown; Gilbert v. Bottle,  at para. 233.
156  The earnings approach involves a form of math-oriented methodology such as: (1) postulating a minimum annual income loss for the plaintiff's remaining years of work, multiplying the annual projected loss by the number of remaining years and calculating a present value; or (2) awarding the plaintiff's entire annual income for a year or two: Pallos.
157  Both approaches are correct and will be more or less appropriate depending on whether the loss in question can be quantified in a measureable way: Perren.
158  The principles that apply in assessing loss of future earning capacity were summarized in Reilly v. Lynn,  at para. 101:
The relevant principles may be briefly summarized. The standard of proof in relation to future events is simple probability, not the balance of probabilities, and hypothetical events are to be given weight according to their relative likelihood: Athey v. Leonati,  at para. 27. A plaintiff is entitled to compensation for real and substantial possibilities of loss, which are to be quantified by estimating the chance of the loss occurring: Athey v. Leonati, supra, at para. 27, Steenblok v. Funk  at 135 (C.A.). The valuation of the loss of earning capacity may involve a comparison of what the plaintiff would probably have earned but for the accident with what he will probably earn in his injured condition: Milina v. Bartsch  at 93 (S.C.). However, that is not the end of the inquiry; the overall fairness and reasonableness of the award must be considered: Rosvold v. Dunlop ,  at para. 11; Ryder v. Paquette,  (C.A.) . Moreover, the task of the Court is to assess the losses, not to calculate them mathematically: Mulholland (Guardian ad litem of) v. Riley Estate  (C.A.). Finally, since the course of future events is unknown, allowance must be made for the contingency that the assumptions upon which the award is based may prove to be wrong: Milina v. Bartsch, supra, at 79. In adjusting for contingencies, the remarks of Dickson J. in Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd., supra, at 253, are a useful guide:
First, in many respects, these contingencies implicitly are already contained in an assessment of the projected average level of earnings of the injured person, for one must assume that this figure is a projection with respect to the real world of work, vicissitudes and all. Second, not all contingencies are adverse ... Finally, in modern society there are many public and private schemes which cushion the individual against adverse contingencies. Clearly, the percentage deduction which is proper will depend on the facts of the individual case, particularly the nature of the plaintiff's occupation, but generally it will be small ...
Cost of Future Care
159  A plaintiff is entitled to compensation for the cost of future care based on what is reasonably necessary to restore him to his pre-accident condition in so far as that is possible.
160  The test for determining the appropriate award under the heading of cost of future care is an objective one based on medical evidence. For an award of future care: (1) medical evidence must justify claims for cost of future care; and (2) the claims must be reasonable: Milina v. Bartsch,  (S.C.) at para. 199 [Milina].
161  Future care costs must be justified both because they are medically necessary and they are likely to be incurred by the plaintiff. The award of damages is thus a matter of prediction as to what will happen in future. If a plaintiff has not used a particular item or service in the past it may be inappropriate to include its cost in a future care award: Izony v. Weidlich,  at para. 74.
Special Damages
162  An injured person is entitled to recover the reasonable out-of-pocket expenses they incurred as a result of an accident. The fundamental governing principle is that an injured person is to be restored to the position he or she would have been in had the accident not occurred: X. v. Y.,  at para. 281.
Discussion
1. Should I draw an adverse inference against the plaintiff for failing to call Dr. Foti?
163  I conclude that the circumstances surrounding Dr. Foti's involvement in the plaintiff's treatment and his failure to adduce evidence from Dr. Foti do not warrant the drawing of an adverse inference.
164  The defence contends that an adverse inference should be drawn by reason of the plaintiff's failure to adduce evidence from Dr. Foti.
165  The plaintiff relies on MacKenzie J.'s comments in Lipinski v. Mein,  [Lipinski]. In that case, the Court refused to draw an adverse inference regarding orthopedic surgeons who were not called at trial but who provided consultation reports to the family doctor. The Court said that it had no reason to draw an adverse inference because the orthopedic surgeons had seen the plaintiff only once. The Court concluded that the family doctor was able to rely on the orthopedic surgeons' opinions, but the absence of their opinions was a matter of weight to be accorded to the family doctor's opinion since she relied on their opinions.
166  The defendants submit that the current approach to adverse inferences in injury cases was addressed in Buksh v. Miles, . Saunders J.A. said at para. 33:
However, it bears reminding that the delivery of medical care is not now as it was in 1964 when Mr. Justice Davey made his comments in Barker. There is, today, a proliferation of "walk-in" medical clinics where the role of the "walk-in" clinic physician may be more limited than was the role of a family physician in 1964. Further, even people who have a family doctor may attend one or more such clinics as a matter of convenience, but still rely upon their family physician for core medical advice and treatment. The proposition stated by Mr. Justice Davey does not anticipate this present model of medicalcare. Likewise, the discovery process available to both sides of a lawsuit is not now as it was in 1964 when, in explaining his view on the need to call all treating physicians, Mr. Justice Davey referred to the professional confidence between a doctor and the patient. Today, the free exchange of information and provision of clinical records through document discovery raises the possibility that an adverse inference may be sought in circumstances where it is known to counsel asking for the inference that the opinion of the doctor in question was not adverse to the opposite party.
[Emphasis added]
167  Saunders J.A. described the type of detail that should be considered in determining whether an adverse inference might be made:
 [35]  In this environment, and bearing in mind the position of a lawyer bound to be truthful to the court, it seems to me there is a threshold question that must be addressed before the instruction on adverse inferences is given to the jury: whether, given the evidence before the court, given the explanations proffered for not calling the witness, given the nature of the evidence that could be provided by the witness, given the extent of disclosure of that physician's clinical notes, and given the circumstances of the trial (e.g., an initial agreement to introduce clinical records that work contrary to the inference, or incorporation of that witness's views or observations in the report of a witness called by the other side) a juror could reasonably draw the inference that the witness not called would have given evidence detrimental to the party's case. 
[Emphasis added]
168  Lipinski is apposite to this case. Dr. Foti saw Mr. Gillespie only twice and his records were available to the defence. His opinion was contained in his consultation report to Dr. Levis and in the records relied on by Dr. Levis; the extent to which Dr. Levis relied on that opinion goes to the weight of Dr. Levis's evidence. Dr. Eisen also referred to the findings in Dr. Foti's consultation report.
169  I observe from the documents that Dr. Foti's opinion was not adverse to Mr. Gillespie's claim.
170  In my view the comments in Buksh regarding the revelation of a favorable opinion to the plaintiff from documents produced in the litigation are meant to inform the Court that, where a favorable opinion exists but is not produced in the trial, it would be unreasonable to draw an adverse inference due to the absence of such an opinion which is known to the parties to support the plaintiff. The discovery process is in place to shield the defendant from any prejudice that might result if a plaintiff obtains and withholds an adverse opinion from a treating doctor.
171  The weight of Dr. Levis's opinion may be adversely affected by the fact that Dr. Foti's evidence was an important feature in forming her opinion but was not tested in the trial. After considering these aspects to the defendants' request, I conclude that this is not an appropriate case to draw an adverse inference against the plaintiff for not adducing Dr. Foti's opinion and I will not draw such an inference.
2. How much weight should I give the expert medical evidence?
172  After hearing submissions on this issue and carefully examining the expert medical evidence, I give Dr. Levis's opinion diminished weight, and Dr. Eisen's opinion very little weight on the issue of metabolic syndrome.
173  Dr. David's evidence was tendered by the plaintiff and not challenged in any way; I give considerable weight to his opinions but I do not find them determinative of the main issues regarding the head injury.
174  I will examine each opinion in turn to explain why I prefer Dr. Levis's opinion notwithstanding its diminished weight.
Dr. Levis
175  Dr. Levis's letter raises significant issues regarding her opinion.
176  As an example, she concluded that Mr. Gillespie suffered injuries because of the accident, but she framed her opinion in an odd form; she said "he was diagnosed with mild traumatic head injury (concussion)" suggesting that the diagnosis was made by someone else. In cross-examination she clarified that it was her personal opinion that Mr. Gillespie suffered a traumatic head injury.
177  Dr. Levis referred the plaintiff to Dr. Foti, a neurologist, and appended a copy of his consultation report to her report. She said she relied on that opinion but Dr. Foti did not provide an opinion in the trial, and he was obviously not cross-examined on his opinion.
178  Dr. Levis has no special training in head injury medicine other than in her training as a family practitioner. She described her training as a family doctor and said she assesses head injury claims, on average, five times per year and usually in regard to sports injuries.
179  It is troubling that Dr. Levis relied on the Dr. Foti's neurological opinion without the plaintiff offering Dr. Foti for cross-examination. Indeed, his opinion goes to the heart of the issue to be decided in this case. The most salient factor described in both Dr. Eisen's evidence and Dr. Levis's evidence is the importance of identifying the presence of an altered state of consciousness shortly after the incident as a precondition diagnosing a brain injury following an accident.
180  I have not drawn an adverse inference from the fact that Dr. Foti did not testify, but Dr. Levis's opinion is, for that reason, less helpful. Because Dr. Levis relied on the Dr. Foti's opinion, I must assess the weight to be given to her opinion insofar as she has relied on hearsay evidence: Mazur at para. 40.
181  For the following reasons I accord diminished weight to her opinion based on several issues with the material she relied on.
182  Dr. Foti described Mr. Gillespie as being dazed at the scene with a brief amnesic period and imprecision in his recollection of the sequence of events in the following days. It does not appear to me that the evidence given by Mr. Gillespie supports the assumptions cited by Dr. Foti.
183  Dr. Levis's account of what the plaintiff told her on December 3, 2009 at this point differs from Dr. Foti.
184  Dr. Levis testified that in her December 3, 2009 meeting with the plaintiff, he was a good historian, and he had no troubling memory gaps in his account of the accident. She did not record any evidence of an altered state of consciousness after the accident.
185  Moreover, in her initial consultation with Mr. Gillespie, she did not report any concern about a concussion sustained by the plaintiff. She said he did not have dizziness. On her December 21 consultation, he described poor short term memory, reversing numbers and intermittent headaches. At "this visit" she concluded his diagnosis was "most likely post-concussion syndrome".
186  When pressed on the issue, Dr. Levis agreed that the first indication in her notes that Mr. Gillespie had suffered an alteration in consciousness was on February 8, 2010. Clearly, that date is well after her initial consultation.
187  In her February 8, 2011 consultation request to the concussion clinic, Dr. Levis said that the plaintiff did not suffer post-traumatic amnesia or a loss of consciousness within 30 minutes of the accident. This is directly contrary to Dr. Foti's assumption that Mr. Gillespie did suffer amnesia. Further in her note to the clinic she said the plaintiff had been dazed or confused and had suffered a concussion. It appears her comment could only have been based on Mr. Gillespie's self-report of things on December 21 and not December 3. She did not mention when his confusion or dazed state began or ended. Dr. Levis's first note of the plaintiff's memory problems was on December 21, 2009.
188  Dr. Levis did not speak with the plaintiff's wife about his symptoms until several years later. I would have expected his wife to have been an important source of information when Dr. Levis was considering the possibility of a head injury.
189  In other words, Dr. Levis did not diagnose an altered state of consciousness or a brain injury in 2009 or in early 2010; the first mention that he was "dazed or confused" was in her report to the clinic was on February 8, 2011.
190  Her opinion that the plaintiff had cognitive impairments due to a head injury is based on Mr. Gillespie's self-report and Dr. Foti's opinion. She said that Mr. Gillespie reported dizziness and headaches as "off and on" symptoms. Dr. Levis agreed that headaches, dizziness and cognitive difficulties are not specific indicators of brain injury, but in the current era of the head injury, they are also not required to diagnosis a brain injury. Nonetheless, she agreed that headaches, dizziness and cognitive difficulties can be consistent with whiplash type injuries and soft tissue strains.
191  Dr. Levis said that during her August 30, 2010 meeting with the plaintiff she assessed that his injury was improving and that he was doing well. She concurred that the usual course of recovery from a head injury is for the worst symptoms to appear shortly after the incident with gradual recovery over the ensuing six months. Dr. Levis confirmed that, with head injury victims, improvement occurs over time, and concussion symptoms do not usually regress. If a relapse occurs, physicians will usually look for an alternative explanation.
192  It is significant that on August 8, 2011, Dr. Foti described the plaintiff's condition to include chronic headaches with migraine features along with persistent cognitive symptoms and reduced concentration. He believed that Mr. Gillespie's headaches could improve with a migraine preventer and suggested neuropsychological testing to look for subtle cognitive deficits.
193  Dr. Foti saw the plaintiff in October 2011; he said "his severe headaches have resolved but he still has a mild background headache. He is not experiencing any dry mouth or lightheaded symptoms". His sleep pattern had improved to six hours before he would become restless. He was not tired in the morning and he felt better cognitively. When she saw him on November 14, 2011 he was generally feeling well with less headaches and better sleep. When she saw him on January 9, 2012 his medication was improving his sleep but he had "occasional tweaking and headaches".
194  Dr. Levis did not particularize which parts of Dr. Foti's consultation opinion informed her own opinion other than that her acceptance of his diagnosis that he likely suffered a mild traumatic brain injury. It is unclear what part of the temporal connection between the plaintiff's symptoms in the accident played in the formation of Dr. Levis's opinion.
195  In January 2013 Mr. Gillespie had run out of amitriptyline medication and was noticing poor sleep, headaches and increased anxiety.
196  Dr. Levis's opines that his prognosis for complete recovery of his cognitive impairment persisting and ongoing headaches, irritability, interrupted sleep, is unlikely. Although I have some concerns regarding the flaws in Dr. Levis's opinions, hers is the only evidence I have that addresses Mr. Gillespie's symptoms as resulting from the accident. On the balance of probabilities, her opinion is sufficient to establish that he will endure the effects of his injuries indefinitely.
Dr. Eisen
197  For reasons advanced by the plaintiff, I place little weight on Dr. Eisen's opinion that Mr. Gillespie's symptoms are the result of metabolic syndrome.
198  Dr. Eisen was qualified to give opinion evidence in the field of neurological medicine, including diagnosing and treating mild traumatic brain injuries and the cognitive effects of metabolic syndrome. He was also qualified to give opinions regarding whiplash injuries from a neurological viewpoint.
199  Dr. Eisen had extensive qualifications in his field, beginning with graduation from medical school in 1966 and completing his neurology residency in 1970. He acquired traumatic brain injury experience and clinical practice at McGill University and UBC. He was head of the neurology division at Vancouver General Hospital and the acting head of the department of medicine, and he also engaged in numerous professional societies, university committees, editorial boards, research and supervision of postdoctoral fellows.
200  Dr. Eisen was cross-examined on several articles addressing the diagnosis and features of mild traumatic brain injuries and metabolic syndrome. As I will mention later, I found that part of his evidence quite helpful.
201  Under his summary and conclusions, Dr. Eisen addressed Mr. Gillespie's cognitive problems and said the following:
he believed the plaintiff suffered a whiplash type injury in the December 2009 accident graded as a I-II (no neurological deficit or radiological fractures). He did not believe that Mr. Gillespie suffered a head injury (mild) in the accident even though he sustained a frontal scalp laceration;
the second accident aggravated his whiplash symptoms, neck and back pain;
Mr. Gillespie did not stop working; rather he curtailed his work intensity because of memory impairment and lack of concentration that Mr. Gillespie said resulted from the December 2009 accident. Dr. Eisen confirmed the plaintiff suffered from mild cognitive dysfunction in September 2013. Dr. Foti more than a year after the accident, described the plaintiff as suffering cognitive deficits with accompanying chronic headaches;
the plaintiff's cognitive impairment is independent of either motor vehicle accident; rather it is due to small vessel disease of the brain being impacted by the metabolic syndrome. The plaintiff has all four components of the disorder, namely obesity, hypertension, impaired glucose metabolism, and disordered lipid profile; and,
the plaintiff's background indicates he is at risk for cardiovascular events, transient ischemic attacks, strokes and progressive dementia.
202  Dr. Eisen's report described both accidents as being "of a mild nature".
203  He did not view photographs of the plaintiff's car in the first accident until after he presented his report. He was not aware his car was a total loss or that there was <damage type = "other">$4,900</damage> damage to the taxi and <damage type = "other">$6,900</damage> damage to the cube van. Although the doctor described the plaintiff's windshield as "shattered" he did not know where he obtained that information.
204  Although the second accident was evidently quite minor, in my view, Dr. Eisen was clearly in error in describing the December 2009 accident this way. Although no questions were asked to clarify "mild" "moderate" or "severe" the evidence points to the first accident being in the range of two moderate collisions involving two impacts. Dr. Eisen did not view the photographs of the damage to the three vehicles nor understand the force of impact that led to Mr. Gillespie striking his head. The apparent damage to all three vehicles, the blow to his head, and the description of the impacts during the accident are inconsistent with Dr. Eisen's conclusion that this was a mild impact collision.
205  In this regard I conclude that Dr. Eisen's opinion was based on a clear misapprehension of the accident and the injury mechanism. This factor alone diminishes the weight of his report.
206  The evidence is uncontroversial that Mr. Gillespie's head struck and shattered the windshield in spite of the airbag deploying.
207  I observed that Dr. David concluded that Mr. Gillespie's inner ear dysfunction occurred because of direct impact, acoustic trauma from airbag deployment, and the explosive forces associated with airbag deployment.
208  Dr. Eisen formed his opinion that Mr. Gillespie's ongoing cognitive symptoms following the accident are the product of metabolic syndrome based on his assumptions that Gillespie's past and ongoing health included evidence that he was diabetic and had impaired glucose function, was obese, had untreated hypertension, and had impaired lipid metabolism. He described his condition of metabolic syndrome on the basis of those four factors.
209  In cross-examination, Dr. Eisen acknowledged:
the plaintiff did not meet the diagnostic criteria for diabetes because his Fasting Blood Sugar reading was never greater than seven and his hemoglobin A1C was never greater than 6.5 M. Therefore, he clarified by saying that the plaintiff was pre-diabetic, and he acknowledged that he was wrong in stating that Mr. Gillespie was diabetic;
that he assumed that the plaintiff was abdominally obese for the purposes of diagnosing metabolic syndrome. He acknowledged that he had not measured the plaintiff's abdominal obesity and that there was no evidence of Mr. Gillespie being abdominally obese. When confronted with the fact that the accepted definition of obesity requires a body mass index ("BMI") of 30 he acknowledged that the plaintiff's BMI of 26.6 failed to meet the test and he was wrong in concluding that Mr. Gillespie was obese;
that he said Mr. Gillespie's impaired glucose function was a further feature supporting his metabolic syndrome diagnosis. Under cross-examination, however, counsel took Dr. Eisen to that part of the authoritative study that established that a linear association between fasting glucose and subclinical cerebrovascular disease is established only when the patient's education is less than Grade 12. Indeed, when education levels exceed Grade 12, the literature does not support the association between insulin resistance and the disease (in passing, I will note, Mr. Gillespie graduated Grade 12 and attended Vancouver City College);
that untreated hypertension is a risk factor for metabolic syndrome. However the plaintiff was being treated for hypertension; and,
that the fourth component of metabolic syndrome is impaired lipid metabolism/atherogenic dyslipidemia. On this point, the plaintiff began treatment for hypertension on May 16, 2011, and treatment began two days after his blood test showed a 4.1 reading. That reading was significantly below the risk range.
210  He described metabolic syndrome as a vascular condition affecting small blood vessels in the brain. These vessels bleed and can lead to larger lesions that may be visible on MRI scans.
211  Not only was the expert's opinion based on a clear misapprehension of the accident and the initial injury mechanism but also, in the end, Dr. Eisen's analysis of the underlying data was so flawed that his opinion that the plaintiff suffered from metabolic syndrome is markedly unreliable.
212  In his testimony, Dr. Eisen agreed that mild traumatic brain injuries can be diagnosed if the subject has demonstrated some confusion, disorientation and slow thinking. Indeed, an accident victim who is agitated speaks without making sense, is incoherent, fleets from subject to subject, and is disoriented may be exhibiting the type of altered mental state that defines a brain injury.
213  Dr. Eisen said that a mental state described as being a type of "brownout" might indicate an altered state of consciousness that in turn confirms the presence of a head injury.
214  Dr. Eisen also agreed that certain symptoms - e.g., headaches, dizziness, irritability, anxiety, personality change, fatigue, sleep disturbance, decreased libido, memory dysfunction and impaired concentration and attention - might indicate a head injury.
215  Dr. Eisen said that he, before examining the plaintiff, prepared a draft report based on documents that counsel provided to him. He did not produce a copy of that document to the plaintiff before this trial nor did he produce a copy of it at his cross-examination.
216  Dr. Eisen's opinion that the plaintiff did not suffer a brain injury or concussion was based on his assumption that the plaintiff's cognitive impairment lasted for one to two weeks after the collision and then disappeared. He believed that it was 11 or 12 months later that the plaintiff's cognitive symptoms of short-term memory loss, loss of concentration and sleep impairment returned.
217  However, Dr. Eisen seems to have ignored that Dr. Levis, Fraser Health Concussion Clinic and Dr. Foti recorded the plaintiff's complaints of short-term memory loss, reversing numbers, headaches, dizziness, and difficulty word-finding from December 21, 2009 until October 2011. Clearly, his cognitive problems persisted throughout the months after the accident without abatement; they did not re-emerge 11 -12 months later as assumed by Dr. Eisen. This error by Dr. Eisen relating to his ongoing cognitive impairment would likely have affected his opinion if he had relied on more accurate information.
218  Dr. Eisen's misconstruction of the facts leading to his conclusion that the plaintiff did not suffer a head injury in December 2009 is a significant flaw in his opinion. Further, his opinion that Mr. Gillespie developed unrelated cognitive problems in 2011 because he was experiencing metabolic syndrome is not supported by the facts or his own opinion that some of the indications of Mr. Gillespie's altered state of mind in the interval after the accident were indications of an accident related to mild traumatic brain injury.
219  While I treat his report with little to no weight, Dr. Eisen helpfully corroborated some things that Dr. Levis said, and I found that the following comments assist the Court.
220  Dr. Eisen confirmed as authoritative the conclusions in RW Evans, "Post-Traumatic Headaches" (2004) 22:1 Neurologic Clinics 237, that headaches are common occurrences following head trauma. He agreed that headaches, dizziness, fatigue, irritability, anxiety, insomnia, loss of concentration/memory, and noise sensitivity are the most common complaints of persons suffering post-concussion syndrome. Although he believed that the estimate that 50% of patients with head injuries display these symptoms was high, he accepted that these are the most common complaints that can persist for more than six months. He accepted that headaches can produce cognitive difficulties.
221  Dr. Eisen was referred to Menon et al, "Position Statement: Definition of Traumatic Brain Injury" (2010) 91 Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1637, and acknowledged it to be a peer-reviewed authoritative publication. He acknowledged that altered brain function is signaled by an altered mental state at the time of an injury (e.g., with confusion, disorientation, slowed thinking), and it is considered part of the altered consciousness used to establish a diagnosis of mild traumatic brain injury. That study concluded that a diagnosis of mild traumatic brain injury should be considered when these symptoms are reported even if any more objective criteria - e.g., LOC (loss of consciousness), PTA (posttraumatic amnesia), or other neurologic deficits - are absent.
222  Dr. Eisen also confirmed that disorientation is part of the altered state of consciousness, and it is a positive indication of brain injury. He also confirmed that persons with head injuries are not reliable reporters of historical events.
223  Dr. Eisen was referred to Sterr et al, "Are mild head injuries as mild as we think? Neurobehavioral concomitants of chronic post-concussion syndrome" (2006) 6 BMC Neurology 7, and he confirmed to be a good authoritative journal. He agreed that mild static brain injuries typically induce a range of symptoms such as headaches, blurred vision, poor concentration, sleep disturbance, depressed mood or ability. He also confirmed that post-concussion syndrome can occur without a loss of consciousness; indeed, loss of contact or confusion is sufficient.
224  Dr. Eisen was also referred to P McCorory et al, "Consensus statement on concussion in the sport: the 4th International Conference on Concussion in Sport held in Zurich, November 2012" (2013) 47 Br J Sport Med 250 with SCAT3, and he was satisfied that the British Journal of Sports Medicine was an authoritative publication. He accepts that loss of consciousness is not necessary to constitute a brain injury, and in some cases, signs may evolve over a number of minutes to hours. He accepts that although cognitive symptoms typically improve, symptoms may be prolonged. He said that "brownout" may be sufficient to indicate a brain injury - e.g., someone could speak to a person but not understand what was happening about them - and being woozy or dazed can also be a feature of a head injury.
225  Dr. Eisen agreed that concussed individuals will normally recover within seven to 10 days, but symptoms can be prolonged. He believes that after two to three months, patients begin to worry about their eventual recovery from the symptoms. He recognizes that sleep and cognitive impairment are important symptoms of people with head injuries. Difficulties with concentration and multitasking are evidence of changes in cognitive function of head injured patients.
3. After the accidents, did the plaintiff suffer symptoms from metabolic syndrome unrelated to the accidents or did he suffer a mild traumatic brain injury caused by the first defendant?
226  I conclude that Mr. Gillespie's brain was injured due to his impact with the front windshield during the first accident and that his symptoms are ongoing.
227  In making this decision, I have relied on Dr. Levis's opinion to a very limited extent and more so on Dr. Eisen's comments regarding the scholarly literature relating to diagnosing concussion syndrome.
228  Clearly, on the facts, Mr. Gillespie's head forcefully hit against the windshield, shattering the glass.
229  The generally accepted medical opinion consistently confirms that a diagnosis of mild traumatic brain injury requires evidence of an altered state of consciousness soon after the event in which the injury is sustained. I am mindful that the experts disagree on whether Mr. Gillespie suffered a mild traumatic head injury with ongoing concussion symptoms. However, headaches, dizziness, fatigue, irritability, anxiety, insomnia, loss of concentration and memory, and noise sensitivity are all indicative of post-concussion syndrome. Confusion, disorientation, and slowed thinking are considered part of the altered consciousness used to establish a diagnosis of mild traumatic brain injury.
230  I am mindful that a plaintiff's ability to accurately recall and express post-accident experiences can be hampered by the very injury that is to be assessed. Even the defendants' expert noted that individuals with head injuries are not reliable reporters of historical events. He may have been somewhat unreliable in his testimony; I ascribe that unreliability to the nature of his injury and not to any willful attempt to mislead the Court. I have been able to find the facts necessary to decide this issue in spite of the flaws in Mr. Gillespie's evidence.
231  There is always a difficulty in rejecting the connection between an injury and subsequent symptoms based solely on the temporal connection between them. In this case, I am satisfied that the temporal connection is not the only evidence connecting Mr. Gillespie's blow to the head and ongoing cognitive difficulties he described as affecting his work in day-to-day life.
232  I accept that, in spite of his memory difficulties, Mr. Gillespie was accurate when he said he" felt woozy" after the accident. He did not report pain at that time and was a very poor historian about the events at the scene and afterwards. However, I accept his wife's evidence that when she saw him at the hospital he was waiting to be treated, he had a bandage on the top of his head, and he appeared disoriented. She said he seemed to be in shock and did not make sense when speaking to her. He was normally an easy-going person but at the hospital seemed agitated, incoherent and erratic. She said he was unsteady on his feet.
233  She said Mr. Gillespie would start talking about the accident but his sentences were disjointed. She tried to get him back on track.
234  When they returned to their home, he continued to demonstrate erratic behavior. He did not seem to be able to follow through with any task he started, such as making himself a sandwich.
235  Where Mr. Gillespie was contradictory in his testimony regarding some of these events and symptoms, I ascribe his lack of consistency to the effects of his injuries. He was not a good historian and struggled to resolve inconsistencies with his previous evidence. I accept that he may have exaggerated his inability to perform his duties as effectively as before the accidents, but his evidence was generally convincing on the important aspects of his current function.
236  On the evidence I accept that Mr. Gillespie experienced and continues to experience some of the accepted indicators of post-concussion syndrome and mild traumatic brain injury. Indeed, the concussion clinic treated him as a person who was experiencing those symptoms, and Mr. Gillespie is still following their initial advice. This point would be more forceful if he had returned to the clinic for the suggested second visit and someone from the clinic had testified at the trial. But for the December 2009 collision, I find Mr. Gillespie would not have experienced or continued to experience cognitive impairment, continuing headaches, personality change, sleep disturbance, memory dysfunction, impaired concentration and attention. These are the symptoms associated with post-concussion syndrome and a mild traumatic brain injury.
237  Therefore, I have concluded on the balance of probabilities that Mr. Gillespie suffered a mild traumatic head injury with ongoing concussion symptoms. He also suffered inner ear dysfunction that resulted in intermittent imbalance. Those symptoms resolved through a compensation mechanism involving the ear, the brain and his visual systems. He is at risk for further imbalance problems.
238  Mr. Gillespie also developed neck and low back pain that worsened in the immediate aftermath of the accident. The second accident exacerbated these symptoms although he recovered within 7 to 10 days. He also had leg and right ankle pain that resolved within a short time.
239  Mr. Gillespie does not have any other soft tissue or orthopedic injuries.
4. If the plaintiff suffered a mild traumatic brain injury that the defendant caused, what are the appropriate damages?
240  For the reasons that follow, the plaintiff's claims are allowed at the following:
<damage type = "non-pecuniary">$85,000</damage> for non-pecuniary damages;
<damage type = "past wage loss">$160,000</damage> for past income loss;
<damage type = "future wage loss">$140,000</damage> for loss of future income capacity;
<damage type = "future care">$2,500</damage> for cost of future care; and,
<damage type = "special">$918</damage> for special damages.
241  I will address each category in turn.
Non-Pecuniary Damages
242  Mr. Gillespie has experienced personality changes - including irritability, aggressiveness, agitation, and a shortened temper - and all these changes impact his ongoing business and social life. Mr. Gillespie also suffers from some sleep interruption, headaches and some limited anxiety that usually occurs for a short time in the early morning and does not appear to affect him during the day.
243  Mr. Gillespie injuries have also affected his personal and intimate relationship with his wife.
244  Mr. Gillespie worries about his work performance, but these worries do not appear to create the type of anxiety that stresses him in the morning.
245  Mr. Gillespie is slower at his work and believes he makes more mistakes due to his cognitive changes. Both Dr. Eisen and Dr. Levis agreed that he has cognitive impairment.
246  Regarding recreation, Mr. Gillespie has not returned to golf, but he has a new dog and walks regularly.
247  Mr. Gillespie's symptoms have persisted for more than four years, and I find that that he will likely not return to his pre-accident state of health.
248  Mr. Gillespie referred to various authorities that I have considered in this analysis: Drodge; Joel v. Paivarinta et al., ; Greaves v. Grace, ; Mackie v. Gruber,  aff'd in ; Phoutharath v. Moscrop, .
249  The defendants referred to Warren v. Morgan,  [Warren] in suggesting the plaintiff's claim for non-pecuniary damages should be <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage>.
250  Of these cases, the most helpful analysis is in Drodge.
251  In Drodge, the claimant suffered chronic headaches with mild cognitive impairments associated with memory and concentration problems. His intimate relationship with his wife and recreational activities were significantly restricted. He suffered chronic low back pain before the accident, but the accident increased its frequency and intensity. The plaintiff had claimed to have suffered a mild traumatic brain injury at the time of the collision; the Court rejected this contention because there was insufficient evidence to confirm that he had a reduced level of consciousness or mentation after the impact.
252  Although rejecting the claim of post traumatic brain injury, the Court accepted that the plaintiff had suffered chronic headaches and associated cognitive symptoms for four and a half years following the accident. Dardi J. accepted that the plaintiff suffered severe persistent headaches and mild impairment to his memory and concentration associated with headaches. He was described as having a "crumbling skull" and was awarded <damage type = "other">$85,000</damage>.
253  In Warren, the claimant was involved in two motor vehicle accidents resulting in soft tissue injuries to her back and a concussion. The first accident was a mere tap and the second caused more substantial damage. She claimed to have severe chronic pain, cognitive impairment and psychological issues. The Court found the plaintiff untruthful and rejected her submissions regarding the trajectory of recovery. The Court concluded that her reaction to the accident was disproportionate and rejected the possibility of ongoing concussion symptoms. The plaintiff was found to be completely recovered from her accident related injuries and awarded <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage>.
254  In my view, Mr. Gillespie's circumstances were closely accord with those of the plaintiff in Drodge. The details of the plaintiff's post-accident circumstances and ongoing symptoms are not similar to those referred to in Warren. Although Mr. Gillespie's evidence was punctuated with some inconsistencies, I do not reject his evidence regarding ongoing symptoms and complaints as was done in Warren.
255  Although the authorities cited by the plaintiff are helpful, they are only a general guideline. Each case requires an assessment of an individual's circumstances.
256  I accept that Mr. Gillespie has suffered from ongoing headaches since the accident and that there has been a significant impairment in his concentration and cognitive function caused by the injury to his head. He suffered soft tissue injuries to his neck and low back which were exacerbated by the second accident.
257  His headaches worsened within one week of the accident and shortly after he developed cognitive difficulties that affected his memory and mathematical functions associated with his work. His outward personality changed and he encountered problems with sleeping. He also developed anxiety and a change in mood which have affected his day-to-day life.
258  Mr. Gillespie pursued treatment at the concussion clinic and with a neuropsychiatric; regrettably he did not persist with treatment that might have been available from these health professionals. There was no claim that Mr. Gillespie failed to mitigate his damages and I have no evidence to suggest that his current circumstances would have been improved if he had grasped those opportunities.
259  Dr. Levis opined that Mr. Gillespie will continue to experience these symptoms of headache, irritability, anxiety, interrupted sleep and cognitive difficulties into the future. The evidence of neither doctor indicated these features of Mr. Gillespie's current condition would be permanent continuing into the future.
260  I also take into account that Mr. Gillespie has suffered in vestibular complaint and otolith dysfunction which is not currently symptomatic. The condition may become symptomatic in the future and if this should happen he will be restricted from commercial driving or working around heavy machinery.
261  I conclude that a fair and reasonable award reflecting the past and future reality of how Mr. Gillespie's life has been and will be affected due to the accident is <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$85,000</damage>.
Past Income Loss
262  I am satisfied that the plaintiff's capacity to earn income after the December 2009 accident was impaired because of the injuries he sustained in that collision.
263  I do not accept that the plaintiff suffered any impairment to his income earning capacity because of the January 2010 accident.
264  His past gross and net incomes were:
M Gillespie - December 31, 2007 $489,661 $62,938 
M Gillespie - December 31, 2008 $65,238 $48,747 
MG Flooring - April 30, 2009 $958,180 ($36,472) 
MG Flooring - April 30, 2010 $854,173 $143,529 
MG Flooring - April 30, 2011 $628,726 $77,726 
MG Flooring - April 30, 2012 <damage type = "other">$827,850</damage> <damage type = "other">$166,921</damage> 
MG Flooring April 30, 2013 <damage type = "other">$420,926</damage> <damage type = "other">$22,352</damage> 
265  For the assessment of income Mr. Gillespie might expect from his efforts, I have used the after tax profit of MG Flooring. This is the amount that accumulates in the company's retained earnings account. I expect it will be paid out as dividend income in due course.
266  The plaintiff testified to changes in his cognitive ability, his memory and his personality. He suggests that the combined effect of these symptoms limit his ability to earn the same level of income he would have earned but for the accident and resulting injuries.
267  In general, Mr. Gillespie said small jobs are taking him longer, in part, because he needed to repeat his estimate work to be comfortable that he had not made an error.
268  Mr. Gillespie said he believes he is working at half of his pre-accident pace. He currently works nine hour days, but I found it difficult to discern the full extent of the work he was not bidding on or capable of performing.
269  It is important to note that he "guessed" he was taking twice as long to perform his work before submitting quotes. Before the accident he could do three "takeoffs" (quotes) in a day but would do that work only once; now he repeats his work before submitting his quote. He said that before the accident he could quote a job within 2-3% of his projected profit level; now he is not as accurate and relies on his bookkeeper to keep track of the profit.
270  On the whole, Mr. Gillespie was unable to provide any details about projects he quoted on but failed to win the contracts. He said he erases those details from his computer when he fails to secure the work. Despite the fact that he is making a substantial income loss claim in this proceeding, Mr. Gillespie has unfortunately kept no records of the jobs he has turned down or avoided since the accident.
271  I will proceed through the various years from the date of the accident to the trial to assess how the accident impacted Mr. Gillespie's work.
272  Initially, Mr. Gillespie testified that he did very little work after the accident except for those projects that were already in the mix for the end of the year. However he later testified he could not recall how much work he performed after the accident.
273  In any event, it appears he did very few jobs until summer 2010.
274  In 2010, he took a two week holiday, and on returning, he was able to function well. He said the work eventually became more computer driven, and he found the stress of large jobs overwhelming. In cross-examination, however, he curiously could not remember taking any holidays in 2010.
275  The 2010 profit was <damage type = "other">$162,000</damage>, but some of his 2010 income was earned before the December 2009 accident.
276  In 2011, the first full year after the accident, Mr. Gillespie's net profit was <damage type = "other">$90,808</damage>.
277  The last job he turned down before trial was a 22,000 square foot flooring replacement job in August 2011. He said he found the job had too much detail, so it was too confusing for him.
278  Mr. Gillespie testified that the company's 2012 gross income was <damage type = "other">$827,850</damage>. This amount was up from <damage type = "other">$628,726</damage> in 2011 and down from <damage type = "other">$854,173</damage> in 2010. The 2013 gross income fell to <damage type = "other">$420,926</damage>.
279  In 2012, he was anxious and not feeling well, but in May 2012, he took 20 days off for vacation during which time the company did no business (he took an additional three weeks off in October 2012 and was generally cutting back his work).
280  After returning from his vacation, he felt his health was improved. He was then able to work full time and expend more effort at his work in 2012, but that effort resulted in a decrease of net profit for fiscal 2013 to only <damage type = "other">$22,352</damage>. This was down from fiscal 2012 income of <damage type = "other">$166,921</damage>. This decrease in profit by <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage>, is hard to reconcile with his evidence of better functioning but likely reflects, in part, the added holidays he took in fiscal 2013.
281  His 2013 gross revenue dropped to <damage type = "other">$420,926</damage>. Curiously, his gross profit for 2013 declined to <damage type = "other">$73,306</damage> (17% of gross sales) from <damage type = "other">$246,869</damage> (30% of gross sales) in 2012. His 2013 cost of goods sold was inordinately higher than 2012, and he did not explain this difference.
282  Although the 2013 sales were almost one half of 2012 sales, he testified that 2014 was a good year but no sales numbers were put into evidence. Since May 2013 he has increased his workload. His anxiety, headaches, and sleep disturbance remain at the same level as he has experienced over the last three years.
283  In 2014, Mr. Gillespie did one large job for the Salvation Army. He did not have to attend at this jobsite because he was out of town.
284  Mr. Gillespie's wife will retire in three years, and he would like to move back to the Okanagan with her. He believes that he needs between <damage type = "other">$700,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$800,000</damage> to fund his retirement. As of 2013, his company's retained earnings were <damage type = "other">$329,000</damage>.
285  Mr. Gillespie still enjoys his work in the flooring business, and his business activity is more rewarding when his customers can accommodate his pace. In this case, the plaintiff has kept no records of the work that he might have obtained if he had been fit to investigate and prepare quotes. He did not tender any evidence from prospective customers, other than Mr. Pingot, detailing the larger jobs that could have been available to him but for his injuries.
286  The evidence is, in essence, Mr. Gillespie's personal assessment and an anecdotal discussion about the type of work he would have done or would have qualified to do if he had not been limited in his cognitive functioning and memory-loss qualities that were compromised by his injuries.
287  Mr. Gillespie bore the burden of proof in this claim. I am not satisfied that his evidence permits me to make any mathematical calculation of the quantum of his loss.
288  Mr. Gillespie's company earned revenues of <damage type = "other">$958,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$854,000</damage> in 2009 2010. The company lost money in 2009 (during its first year of operations) because sales costs were <damage type = "other">$942,677</damage>. Net income for 2011 (the first full year after the accident) was almost one half of the income for 2010 and less than one half of the 2012 net income.
289  I accept that Mr. Gillespie's capacity to work was reduced during much of 2011, but his holidays that year were a factor in that reduction.
290  I am equally satisfied that his injuries did not significantly impact his ability to earn income in fiscal 2012.
291  I do not accept Mr. Gillespie's statement that he was working in the order of half-time or at half capacity between the date of the accident and the trial.
292  Indeed, his 2011 sales were 74% of his 2010 sales and 65% of 2009 sales. His 2012 post-accident income is substantially greater than his pre-accident income. After taking two extended holidays totaling some 40 days during fiscal 2013, sales of the business were almost one half of the sales for fiscal 2012. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that he has sustained a loss of his capacity overall to earn income from the date of this accident to the present.
293  I also keep in mind that this is an assessment and not a calculation.
294  The data regarding Mr. Gillespie's historical capacity to earn income from this business in his post-accident performance is uncertain. No evidence was given to inform the Court on his level of sales for fiscal 2014. There was no evidence of efforts by the plaintiff to make accommodations or changes that might have ameliorated the consequences of his injuries.
295  Based on all the evidence, I estimate that the impairment to Mr. Gillespie's ability to earn income before the trial is <damage type = "past wage loss">$160,000</damage>.
296  I recognize this award must be adjusted to reflect the principles in Hudniuk v. Warkentin,  [Hudniuk].
297  Pursuant to s. 98 of the Insurance (Vehicle) Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 231 (the "Act"), a plaintiff is entitled to recover damages for only his or her past net income loss and the Court must deduct the amounts prescribed by s. 98 of the Act from gross earnings lost: Hudniuk.
298  Nevertheless, as the income is paid out to Mr. Gillespie, it will likely be subject only to small business tax rates. He will personally pay the difference between his marginal rate of tax and what the company pays. The calculation of the tax impact on these earnings will be determined after the award has been assessed and in accordance with the Hudniak principle.
299  The parties have leave to address this issue once they have reviewed these reasons.
Loss of Future Earning Capacity
300  In this case, I am not satisfied that the historical performance of the business enables me to perform a mathematical calculation of future income stream with any degree of confidence; indeed, such a calculation would not reasonably measure what might have happened if the accident had not occurred. No evidence helps identify the economic longevity of a person in Mr. Gillespie's circumstances.
301  Counsel suggested I could consider negative and positive contingencies based on the data presented. I am satisfied that there is a real and substantial possibility that, but for the accident, Mr. Gillespie would have earned significantly more income than he is now able to earn confined by the limitations of the effects of his injuries.
302  I am satisfied that he was pursuing two objectives: he wanted to accumulate sufficient income to enjoy a comfortable retirement, and he wanted to embrace the optimum vacation opportunities that coincided with his wife's employment.
303  The plaintiff invites the Court to assume that he would have continued to work and earn income at the same levels that were open to him before the accident. The vicissitudes in evidence do not warrant such an assumption.
304  Mr. Gillespie's income from 2008 - 2009 were well below those incomes he achieved in 2010 and later. He offered no explanation for the differences and he did not address the differences in his businesses performance over those years.
305  Income projections depend on levels of commercial construction and renovation ongoing at any given time. No evidence assisted the Court in estimating or anticipating the future prospects in flooring from now until Mr. Gillespie's suggested retirement date.
306  In the end, I accept that Mr. Gillespie is less capable overall from earning income from other types of employment; that he would be less marketable or attractive as an employee; that there has been some restriction in his income earning opportunities and he overall is less valuable as a person capable of earning income in a competitive marketplace. His physical and mental resources have been compromised. Nonetheless, he retains the ability to earn income in his flooring business and the task is to assess the impact these injuries will have on his future performance. There will be some diminution in that performance.
307  In the end, I will assess his damages with the view to incorporating the principles in Brown as the plaintiff argued. I will also consider that some empirical evidence pointed to Mr. Gillespie's economic success achieved in fiscal 2010 to 2012.
308  In an effort to find a balance between these two principles, I have concluded that Mr. Gillespie's impaired earning capacity should be assessed at <damage type = "future wage loss">$140,000</damage>.
309  I observe that the cumulative sums awarded for past and future income losses, when added to his 2013 retained earnings will leave him with <damage type = "other">$653,000</damage> toward his "nest egg" for retirement.
310  He has been busy through 2014, and I expect he will shortly achieve the <damage type = "other">$800,000</damage> he targeted as the amount he wanted for his retirement and relocation to the Okanagan. I am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that Mr. Gillespie would have worked beyond 2016 if the accident had not happened.
311  I conclude that he is likely to retire shortly after he achieves his financial goal, and he would have retired at the same time if the accident had not happened.
Costs of Future Care
312  The only amount Mr. Gillespie seeks to cover for future care costs is his requirements for ongoing extra strength Tylenol.
313  I am satisfied that he will likely require ongoing medication to deal with his headaches and that the amount claimed to compensate for his future care costs should be allowed at <damage type = "future care">$2,500</damage>.
Special Damages
314  I am equally satisfied that Mr. Gillespie has incurred modest expenses for extra strength Tylenol consumed to date as necessary to ameliorate the headaches that have plagued him since the accident.
315  I will allow <damage type = "special">$918</damage>.
Summary
316  In summary, damages are awarded as follows:
<damage type = "non-pecuniary">$85,000</damage> dollars for non-pecuniary damages;
<damage type = "past wage loss">$160,000</damage> for past income loss,
<damage type = "future wage loss">$140,000</damage> for loss of future income capacity,
<damage type = "future care">$2,500</damage> for cost of future care,
<damage type = "special">$918</damage> for special damages.
Costs
317  If the parties are unable to agree on costs, they may speak to the issue.
T.C. ARMSTRONG J.
End of Document
Gregory v. Penner, [2010] B.C.J. No. 32
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
New Westminster, British Columbia
E.A. Arnold-Bailey J.
Heard: July 13-16, 27 and 28, 2009.
Judgment: January 11, 2010.
Docket: M108105
Registry: New Westminster
[2010] B.C.J. No. 32   |      |      |
Between Lisa Marie Gregory, Plaintiff, and Dustin Patrick Penner a.k.a. Dustin Patrick Donald Penner a.k.a. Dustin Penner, Defendant
(206 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Body injuries — Chest — Neck — Whiplash — Arm injuries — Wrist — Recoverable losses — Loss of income — Housekeeping service — Action by Gregory for damages suffered in a motor vehicle accident — Liability not in issue — Gregory suffered soft tissue injuries to her neck, left arm, shoulder and wrist and a ruptured breast implant — $95,000 non-pecuniary damages — No loss of future income or earning capacity award — No award for housekeeping services — $8,400 for past wage loss, $6,383 for cost of future care, $4,038 for special damages.
Damages — Types of damages — For personal injuries — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Special damages — Employment income — Non-pecuniary loss — Action by Gregory for damages suffered in a motor vehicle accident — Liability not in issue — Gregory suffered soft tissue injuries to her neck, left arm, shoulder and wrist and a ruptured breast implant — $95,000 non-pecuniary damages — No loss of future income or earning capacity award — No award for housekeeping services — $8,400 for past wage loss, $6,383 for cost of future care, $4,038 for special damages.
Action by Gregory for damages suffered in a motor vehicle accident. Liability for the accident was admitted by Penner. Gregory claimed to have suffered soft tissue injuries to the left side of her body, resulting in increased migraine headaches, reduced mobility of her left arm and hand, and a ruptured breast implant that has deformed her left breast. Gregory left her job in a grocery store as a result of the injury and commenced training to become a welder. She held one welding position then eventually gained employment as a driver. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 Gregory suffered soft tissue, whiplash-related injuries to her neck, left shoulder, arm and wrist in the accident, from which she was substantially recovered 12 months after the accident. The rupture of her left breast implant was caused by the accident, which caused considerable additional pain and discomfort associated with the injury to her left breast and the ongoing disfigurement. Gregory was awarded <damage type = "sub-non-pecuniary">$65,000</damage> non-pecuniary damages for the ruptured breast implant and <damage type = "sub-non-pecuniary">$30,000</damage> non-pecuniary damages for her soft tissue injuries. Gregory did not establish that her injuries resulted in a substantial possibility of a future event leading to an income loss. There was no award for loss of future income or future earning capacity. Gregory was awarded <damage type = "past wage loss">$8,400</damage> for past wage loss. It was impossible to quantify the housekeeping services performed by Gregory's daughter. Gregory was awarded <damage type = "future care">$6,383</damage> for cost of future care for the replacement of her breast implant and <damage type = "special">$4,038</damage> in special damages.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Court Order Interest Act, RSBC 1996, CHAPTER 79,
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: Thomas L. Spraggs and Afeeza Sovani.
Counsel for the Defendant: Raymon Pici.
Reasons for Judgment
E.A. ARNOLD-BAILEY J.
1   Lisa Marie Gregory (the "plaintiff") is suing Dustin Patrick Penner (the "defendant") for personal injuries she claims to have sustained in a motor vehicle collision that occurred on September 11, 2006, on the Mary Hill Bypass in the City of Port Coquitlam, British Columbia (the "accident"). Liability for the accident is admitted on behalf of the defendant.
2  In the accident the rear of the plaintiff's vehicle was struck by the left front of the defendant's vehicle, and as a result of the impact the plaintiff claims to have sustained soft tissue injuries to the left side of her body, resulting in increased migraine headaches, reduced mobility of her left arm and hand, and a ruptured breast implant that has deformed her left breast.
3  As a result of these injuries the plaintiff seeks non-pecuniary damages for pain and suffering, an award for diminished capacity to earn income in the future, past wage loss, awards for loss of housekeeping ability, cost of future care, and special damages. After the accident, due to the injuries she sustained, the plaintiff claims that she was unable to maintain her former occupation as a meat packer, and then was unable to work as a welder upon retraining. She also claims to have been financially unable to have her deflated breast implant replaced. In relation to the latter she was unsuccessful in obtaining an advance from the defendant's insurer, the Insurance Corporation of British Columbia ("ICBC"), to facilitate the same: Gregory v. Penner, .
4  The defendant disputes the extent and duration of the injuries claimed by the plaintiff. The defendant's position is that the plaintiff indicated to a doctor on August 2, 2007, that she was recovered from the accident-related injuries so as to qualify for re-training as a welder. Counsel for the defendant submits that the evidence linking an increase in the number and severity of the plaintiff's migraine headaches to the accident is equivocal, and that causation has not been established in relation to the rupture of the plaintiff's left breast implant.
Issues to be Decided
5  The substantive issues to be decided in this case are:
Which of the injuries and symptoms the plaintiff claims to suffer from, since the date of the accident to the trial, are proven on a balance of probabilities to have been contributed to or caused by the defendant's negligence in the accident, as opposed to being pre-existing, unrelated, or not proven to exist.
What is the extent of the losses suffered by the plaintiff proven to arise from the accident and what is the appropriate quantum of damages in relation to those losses under the various heads of damages claimed, namely:
non-pecuniary loss;
loss of future income and future earning capacity;
past wage loss;
loss of housekeeping ability;
cost of future care; and
special damages.
To what extent, if any, has the plaintiff failed to mitigate the injuries and symptoms attributable to the accident by not following the prescribed treatment plan or engaging in activities not conducive to a full recovery.
The Trial
6  At the trial the plaintiff testified, as did Dr. Ross Horton, a plastic surgeon. Also called on behalf of the plaintiff was Mr. John Banks, a rehabilitation consultant with a specialty in vocational evaluation and work capacity assessment; Mr. Darren Benning, an economist and an expert in the past and future income loss; Ms. Marion Nihls, a physiotherapist and a specialist in musculoskeletal rehabilitation; Mr. Fred Chaloner, a long-time friend of the plaintiff; Ms. Irene Mayoh, the plaintiff's mother; and Ms. Chandra Mayoh, the plaintiff's daughter. After sustained efforts by counsel for the plaintiff and an adjournment of the trial for several weeks, the plaintiff was also able to call her family doctor, Dr. Cremona Ticea, who failed to attend in response to the first subpoena.
7  In response the defendant, Dustin Penner, testified; as did Mr. Leonard Solstad, an estimator employed by ICBC. Counsel for the defendant also presented the video disposition evidence of Dr. Karen Wardill.
Relevant Evidence and Findings
8  I have reviewed the evidence at trial in order to determine the issues I have identified. What follows is a summary of the relevant facts derived from the evidence and my findings as to the credibility and reliability of the testimony of each witness. I will conclude this section with my findings as to the nature and extent of the plaintiff's injuries that I find were caused by the accident.
Evidence called on behalf of the plaintiff
The Plaintiff, Lisa Marie Gregory
9  The plaintiff is a 44 year old separated mother of two: a 20 year old daughter (Chandra Mayoh, who testified); and a son, aged 11 years. On the date of the accident, September 11, 2006, the plaintiff was going to pick up her son up from school when she got caught in stop and go traffic on the Mary Hill Bypass and her vehicle, a leased white 2002 Impala, was struck from behind by a black Volkswagen vehicle, owned and driven by the defendant. She recalled feeling "a big jolt", but was not sure what had happened. She said she had difficulty undoing her seat belt. The plaintiff recalled being asked by a female police officer, who was attending another accident nearby, if she wanted an ambulance to be called, which she declined because she was anxious to collect her son from school. She was asked by the officer to move her car to the side, which she did. When she got out of her car she saw black marks on the rear of her vehicle. She saw that the front left signal light and the front bumper of the Volkswagen were damaged. After the police officer wrote up the report, the plaintiff continued on her way.
10  In terms of how she recalled the moment of the collision and how she felt immediately afterwards, the plaintiff said she remembered "a big jolt" in which her head was flung forward and that her chest was very sore afterwards. She said that her chest must have been hit as she was flung forward.
11  The plaintiff said that she was wearing her shoulder seat belt across her chest and lap, her head rest was properly adjusted, and, if the car had an air bag, it did not go off. Within a few minutes of the accident the plaintiff said she felt pain in her chest and the back of her neck. Right after the accident she considered herself to be in shock, a nervous wreck, very disoriented, and only thinking of picking up her son. She said that she reported the accident immediately to ICBC. Later that evening she experienced nausea, chest pain, and a very severe migraine for which she took Gravol and four Advil.
12  Upon waking up the next day the plaintiff said that her neck was stiff and sore, she had an excruciating migraine, her chest was sore, and her left arm felt "like almost I had to unfold it". She described tingling feelings in both hands and she found that her left wrist was hard to rotate, unlike her right one. She said that her chest, and specifically the area of her left breast, was very sore. She also noticed bruises on her inner left forearm in the area of her bicep. She described the pain as being a "9 out of 10". She said that she went from being very physically fit to feeling like she had been beaten up.
13  The plaintiff testified that prior to the accident she had not been in any motor vehicle accidents in the previous two years or undergone any surgeries except the breast augmentation surgery in Florida in 2005. She said that she had breast augmentation surgery at the age of 39 to improve her appearance and her self-esteem. She chose to have saline implants as she understood them to be the safest.
14  The day after the accident the plaintiff went to work at Hill's Foods, an organic meat, poultry and game processing and packing plant ("Hill's"), where she worked packing their products. Prior to the accident she had been working there for a year, full-time with some over-time, for <damage type = "other">$12</damage> per hour plus benefits. She had a problem her first day back to work, when she was unable to lift a tray of chicken breasts and it collapsed to the floor. She said that lifting like this was something that she did many times every day at work. She recalled starting the day with a migraine and experiencing numbness and tingling in her hands and fingers, which she described as "the weirdest sensation". She said that when she rotated her left wrist it felt really stiff and it got stiffer throughout the day. The plaintiff recalls telling her supervisor that she was not feeling well and thinks that she left early. She also recalls experiencing nausea that day and taking more Advil and Gravol before going to bed early.
15  Several days after the accident the plaintiff found that her left arm was very stiff and sore, more towards the area of her left shoulder. When she went to get dressed she found it difficult to put clothes on if she had to raise her arms. The plaintiff described the tingling sensation in her hands to be accompanied by a burning sensation in the area of her left breast, and that at times she would feel like there was electricity going through her left breast.
16  Three weeks after the accident, the plaintiff recalled that she woke up with a stiff neck and a migraine, tingling in her hands, and experienced difficulty in rotating her left wrist and in moving her left shoulder while putting on her tops and bras. Upon getting out of the shower, she noticed that her left breast was quite a bit smaller than her right breast and she asked her daughter to take a look. The plaintiff also noticed that a lump was present in her left breast. She recalled sitting on her couch in excruciating pain and in tears, taking four to six Ibuprofen or Advil at a time. She became concerned that she had breast cancer. She described the pain she experienced in her left breast at this time as approaching the pain of child birth.
17  As a result, the plaintiff went to the Emergency Department at Eagle Ridge Hospital on October 4, 2006. She said that she waited until then because as a single mother with two children she felt that it was imperative that she continue working.
18  The plaintiff indicated that she did work between September 12 and October 5, 2006, on "light duties", which she was initially able to manage, but after time she found that she could not perform the required light duties as the burning sensation in her breast, the pain in her left wrist, soreness in her left shoulder, and tingling in her fingers were still there. About a month after the accident the plaintiff said that she still could not drive as she could not shoulder check. She continued to experience a burning feeling in her chest all the time, and periodically she felt the electrical-like sensation.
19  The plaintiff went to her family doctor, Dr. Shehata, on October 5, 2006, and told her about the accident. She reported experiencing the worst migraines ever, pain and soreness in her neck, left shoulder and left wrist, and that her chest was hurting as a result of the accident. At this time, the plaintiff said she was having a lot of trouble getting dressed and was experiencing a lot of burning and pain in her chest. Dr. Shehata arranged for the plaintiff to have an ultra sound of her left breast on October 11, 2006, upon which the plaintiff learned that the saline implant in her left breast had ruptured and the lump was caused by fat necrosis.
20  The plaintiff was referred to Dr. Horton, a plastic surgeon, whom she saw on October 31, 2006. She learned from Dr. Horton that she would need to have surgery to replace the implant. He gave her a series of cortisone shots over several appointments to dissipate the fat necrosis in her left breast. The plaintiff found the injections very upsetting as she is scared of needles. However, she said that she was prepared to do anything to get rid of the lump, which was about an inch and a half in diameter. On one occasion, the needle broke in the course of Dr. Horton trying to inject the lump. She said that the treatments reduced the size of the lump but that the burning and electrical sensations in her left breast persisted.
21  The plaintiff understood that as of early 2007 she should have the left breast implant replaced, but said that she had not done so because she could not afford it. She was advised it would cost about <damage type = "other">$6,000</damage>. She said that she did not have the funds, nor was she able to borrow them. She said that the ICBC claims adjuster declined to provide her with the necessary funds because he took the position that the ruptured breast implant was not connected to the accident.
22  At the time of trial the plaintiff had not had the surgery to replace the ruptured left breast implant. She understood that the lump of necrotic fat was gone. She indicated that she was still experiencing the burning and electrical sensations in the area of her left breast on a sporadic basis throughout the day, every day. She said that when she had the lump the pain was a "9", whereas now it is a "7". She continues to take Ibuprofen and Advil. She remains concerned about the presence of a foreign object in her left breast and worries about cancer, as she previously had cervical cancer. She indicated that she is able to have the surgery when she can pay for it as long as Dr. Horton is available, and that it will take about two weeks for her to recover. She is worried that because of scar tissue in her left breast she may not be able to have a size "D" cup again when she gets the left implant replaced and, if that is the case, then she will have to have the size of her right breast implant reduced. At present, to create the appearance of breasts of equal size the plaintiff wears an artificial rubber breast inside the left side of her bra.
23  From October 5, 2006, until just prior to trial, the plaintiff continued to see physicians to help her recover, in terms of diagnosing the extent of her injuries and recommending treatment, including physiotherapy. Initially, she saw Dr. Shehata, and then switched to the Kensington Clinic where she primarily saw Dr. Ticea, and on other occasions saw other doctors, including Dr. Wardill, who testified by video deposition on behalf of the defendant. Between October 2006 and April 2007, the doctors provided the plaintiff with a series of notes regarding her employment, initially recommending her for light duties, and then explaining absences of varying length due to accident-related complaints.
24  The plaintiff testified that this ongoing injury has affected her life considerably. She will not date and has found that she is less outgoing and sociable, which has caused her relationship with her children to deteriorate somewhat. She likes to express her love for her children with physical gestures and finds this is hampered by her injuries and the on-going pain and discomfort. She also finds that since the accident she has started to experience panic attacks that happen quite frequently and "out of the blue", in which her heart races, her hands shake, and she cannot control her breathing. Also, about a year after the accident the plaintiff said that she became "very gloomy". On January 19, 2007, Dr. Ticea recommended that the plaintiff see a psychologist. The plaintiff advised that she was unable to see a psychologist due to the cost. She was also assessed by a psychiatrist upon referral from a doctor at the clinic.
25  The plaintiff obtained an initial referral for physiotherapy from Dr. Shehata, which was followed up by subsequent referrals from Dr. Ticea. The plaintiff underwent physiotherapy with Ms. Marion Nihls. She attended a number of appointments before taking a more intensive program of active rehabilitation, which ended in March 2007. The plaintiff considered that for about six months afterwards she slowly came to have greater movement in her neck and left wrist.
26  With regards to her neck, the plaintiff says she still experiences pain and stiffness. She still experiences pain in her left shoulder and has problems with the rotation in her left wrist. When she gets up in the morning she regularly has a migraine. She sleeps with two pillows under her head and shoulders as she learned in the active rehabilitation program. She continues to do the exercises she learned in that program to strengthen her neck, her left arm and wrist, and her core. She does stretching exercises for 10 to 15 minutes in the morning, and found on the day she testified that her neck was "not too bad", as she could bend it quite well to the right, but was more limited to the left, and could only rotate it about 25 degrees from straight ahead.
27  Prior to the accident, the plaintiff testified that she was very physically active and in excellent shape. She rode her bike and liked to wrestle and play physically with her children. She was a serious recreational swimmer, having been a competitive swimmer when she was young. She also played tennis, hiked, played co-ed baseball and taught swimming. As a young woman, she indicated that she had set national records for the butterfly and breast strokes, and had held the 100 meter national record in the butterfly stroke for the 30 to 35 year old age group. She was also a long distance runner at 12 years old and held a record for running the mile. She had then cross-trained between running and swimming to build up her endurance.
28  Since the accident the plaintiff testified that she cannot run as the movement causes her left breast to hurt, so now she walks quickly and wears a sports bra to reduce movement of her left breast. She said that she has not returned to swimming recreationally since the accident. She stated that when she goes to the pool she has a cappuccino while watching her son swim. She says that her neck is always sore and to exercise she takes Ibuprofen so as not to "end up as big as a house".
29  In terms of the plaintiff's ability to lift things, she said that in the first month after the accident she was unable to lift things like she had previously, as indicated with the collapse of the tray of chicken at Hill's. She said her employment at Hill's involved being on her feet all day, moving and lifting meat and poultry products on racks and trays. Initially, when she was on light duties in October 2006, she was able to perform the required tasks, but then as her left breast became more sore and the fat necrosis accumulated her chest became very painful, the pain in her neck affected her arm, and she found the pain to be more severe in the rotator cuff of her left shoulder. When she was no longer able to work she was on medical unemployment and then regular employment insurance.
30  In the spring of 2007, the plaintiff took an active rehabilitation program recommended by her doctor and supported by ICBC. This consisted of a "full-time" rehabilitation program for four days a week, for a period of four to six weeks. She said that her breast pain was not diminished by this program, but found that it was a great help in terms of increasing her mobility and reducing the pain in the area of her neck, left shoulder, arm and wrist, and in increasing her mobility. She found that it reduced her migraines. She considered that it reduced the pain in these areas from "a nine" to "a seven". It was recommended at the end of the program that she return to light duties at Hill's, but she had been laid off.
31  The plaintiff explained that prior to the accident she had wanted to go to welding school at BCIT to become a qualified welder. The program took a year and she believed she was strong enough to do the work. She considered the rate of pay and employment opportunities to be desirable. In order to be approved for the welding course, the plaintiff required medical clearance. She testified that she considered herself not to be completely recovered, but well enough to go to welding school. She saw Dr. Wardill at the Kensington Clinic on August 2, 2007, to obtain the necessary medical approval to take the welding course, although the plaintiff disagrees that she ever said she was "fully recovered" from the accident. The plaintiff actually attended twice for this purpose as she saw Dr. Wardill again the next day to have the note permitting her to take the welding course reworded to make it more explicit.
32  The plaintiff started in the welding course in August 2007, having been involved in the preceding months arranging for Employment Insurance to pay for it. She indicated that the course started at 7 a.m. with several hours of classes and then the rest of the training was "hands on" until 1:30 p.m. During this time, she said that she was still experiencing the burning and electrical sensations in her left breast. She found that her left arm was sore and she missed some classes due to migraines. However, she testified that she continued because she thought she was going to have "a good career" as a welder that would be good for her family. In particular, the plaintiff found that the welding and lifting of cast iron to be heavy work. It took her a long time to pass a particular part of the course that involved lifting over her head and much bending of her neck. She said she had to take two to six Advil a day to manage the course.
33  The plaintiff completed the welding program in March 2008. Whereas in the beginning she was at the top of the class, she was one of the last three students to complete it. She said that she "staggered" at the end with her migraines really bothering her. When she considered how she felt in March 2008, as compared to March 2007, the plaintiff said that her migraines had increased and her left arm was bothering her more than it had.
34  In April 2008, the plaintiff found welding work at Vedder Steel at <damage type = "other">$15</damage> per hour. She worked with structural steel, which was not her preference, but as she was just out of training she took the position. She was given a blue print and was to produce what was set out on it. She found that the first several days were not bad and she was getting her tasks done, with some assistance in terms of heavy lifting. However, she found that as she continued her left shoulder became more sore, her neck very tense, and her left wrist very stiff. The plaintiff worked for Vedder Steel for about a month until she quit on April 23, 2008. During that time she thought that she called in sick once.
35  The plaintiff then sought work at a pulp mill, where she worked for a month. She took a position running a "barker", which she understood would not be physically demanding. She found that the long periods of sitting aggravated her neck, and that the job entailed more physical work than she had appreciated, including the lifting of heavy chains. During this time, she experienced on-going soreness in her left shoulder and found that her left wrist was not strong. She continued to experience the burning and electrical sensations in her left breast, which she considered to be present all the time, but which she noticed sporadically. She recalled that she missed one or two days during the month that she worked at the pulp mill.
36  Then the plaintiff went to work for a construction company doing site clean-up for <damage type = "other">$15</damage> per hour. Her duties entailed cleaning the inside of houses, emptying garbage, carrying wood to a pile, raking, and the tamping of sand with a machine. She found that the more she raked and did the heavier outside duties, the more her left shoulder and left wrist hurt. She experienced "quite a few" migraines and found that she was taking up to four Advil or Ibuprofen per day to manage the pain. In particular, she found that the pulling motion in raking aggravated her left shoulder and caused pain in her left breast by movement of the implant. Over the period of four months that she held this employment, the plaintiff said that she missed between two to four days. She left to seek other employment.
37  The plaintiff then found full-time employment with Transparent Glazing as a driver. She delivered prefabricated windows to job sites. This employment did not require any heavy lifting, although she found it difficult to look over her left shoulder. She remained working for Transparent Glass for ten months, until she was laid off in July 2009. During that time she missed about four days of work. The plaintiff said that this work involved a variety of tasks that permitted her to change positions often.
38  In terms of her employment aspirations, the plaintiff said that before the accident her career goal was to be a welder, and while she obtained her level C, she had hoped to get her level B and work making kitchen equipment. Since the accident she said her goals have changed and she now thinks she would like to take a course at Douglas College to qualify to teach sports to children, particularly aboriginal children. She said that she had high hopes for her recovery after the active rehabilitation program, but she has had to switch gears because of the ongoing pain in her neck, left shoulder and the stiffness in her left wrist.
39  The plaintiff testified at some length about her other concerns regarding being able to provide for her children as a single parent and pay for basic living expenses. She said that her relationship with her children is diminished by the financial stress she is experiencing. She said she is short money for rent all the time and cannot remember when she last had a fridge full of food.
40  Prior to the accident the plaintiff testified that she did all her own housekeeping chores, which included vacuuming, washing windows, cleaning bathrooms, doing laundry and washing floors. She had also worked cleaning at a townhouse complex for <damage type = "other">$17</damage> per hour. She liked to move her furniture around to vacuum. Since the accident, the plaintiff said she does some housekeeping chores but her children help more. Right after the accident her daughter did the vacuuming for several months. Now the plaintiff finds the vacuum heavy and does not move the furniture. Her son sweeps the floors and her daughter washes them. At present she says she can do housekeeping chores, but it takes her longer than it did prior to the accident.
41  The plaintiff described a long history of migraine headaches that pre-dated the accident but she claims that since the accident her migraine headaches increased in frequency and severity. While living in Florida prior to 2005, she said she sought medical attention for migraines once every three months and that she had also attended the hospital emergency department a couple of times. The plaintiff testified that prior to the accident she might have a really bad migraine such that she went to the hospital emergency department for an injection once every three months. In addition, once every six months she would have a less severe one that she could treat by staying at home and taking prescribed medication. She recalled during one week in December 2006 she had to attend the hospital emergency room three times.
42  Since the accident, the plaintiff testified that she experiences a really severe migraine once a week and she often has to attend the emergency department. She said the longest a migraine lasts is two days and her symptoms post-accident are much more severe. She has intense pain all over her head, her eyes are very sensitive to light, and her vomiting is much worse, extending at times for more than 24 hours. A less severe migraine lasts a few hours. The plaintiff said she wakes up with tension in her neck every day and has less severe migraines a couple of times a week. She stated she does not get headaches, as to her a headache is a migraine. She said that her family doctor, Dr. Ticea, prescribed her a medication called Imitrex for headaches, which is very expensive. After the accident, she was referred to a specialist for her headaches, Dr. Bozak, a neurologist, who prescribed medication called Topamax and referred her to specialized acupuncture treatments.
43  The plaintiff said she is puzzled as to why in the last four months she has found her left shoulder to be significantly worse. She finds that the pain has become excruciating when she tries to reach overhead, or to undo her bra. She testified that she wakes up every day with migraines, has pain down her neck into her left shoulder and finds that her mobility in her left wrist is reduced by stiffness. She says she is still experiencing the electrical and burning sensations in her left breast. The plaintiff said she now feels like she has gone back to "square one" and that the pain seems to come from nowhere and catch her off guard.
44  At the time of trial, the plaintiff said she experiences about two good days a week when she is able to wake up in the morning and do her stretching exercises and not take pain medications. On the bad days she wakes up with tension in her neck, her left arm feels sore such that she has to "unfold it". She has to take two Advil or Ibuprofen to do her neck exercises. She has a migraine that she would rate as a three or four in terms of the level of discomfort. The pain in her left shoulder does not subside and she experiences the burning and electrical sensations in her left breast. She often goes for a walk with the hope that fresh air will help. The plaintiff says she has three or four bad days a week and some days are a combination of good and bad. Overall she is taking four to six Advil a day to manage her discomfort. For her migraine headaches since the accident she takes Topamax, and a nasal spray. She said she would take Imitrex as prescribed if she was able to afford it.
45  In cross-examination, the plaintiff was questioned about the accident itself. She agreed the traffic had just started to move forward when her vehicle was hit from behind. She said she was looking ahead and did not anticipate the accident. The plaintiff said she felt a jolt and that she is not certain exactly what happened because she was disoriented. When pressed about this later in cross-examination, the plaintiff said she recalled a jolt and being flung forward, and that she believed she hit the steering wheel, but she could not say for sure. She put her car in park, got out without assistance and remained conscious. She recalls looking at the black marks on the rear of her vehicle, which she said did not appear to be accurately shown on the photographs taken later. At the time of the accident, she did not speak to the defendant, but recalls the defendant saying that it did not look too bad. When it was put to the plaintiff that she did not go to a hospital emergency or a walk-in clinic right after the accident because she had no symptoms she vigorously denied that was so, stressing that her only concern was getting to school to pick up her son.
46  The plaintiff admitted that she had panic attacks and experienced depression before the accident. She agreed she had taken Adivan in 2006. At one time she also started taking a medication for depression, Effexor, but was not sure how long she took it.
47  In terms of stress the plaintiff agreed that in 2005 and 2006 her son was experiencing learning disabilities, which had not been diagnosed as anxiety-related at the time. She was worried about him and took him for treatment and to appointments. She agreed that her son's lack of well-being causes her stress, but said he is better now. She agreed her son had a serious incident at school after the accident that she had to deal with. Her spouse's lack of involvement with the children has also caused problems, since her separation in early 2005. She agreed that her lay off from Transparent Glazing was due to a combination of shortage of work and issues related to her son.
48  The plaintiff confirmed that she found the active rehabilitation program to be helpful and agreed that she talked to the physiotherapist, Ms. Nihls, about how she was feeling. However, she denied ever telling Ms. Nihls that she was virtually pain free. Once the program finished she said she would have been able to go back to Hill's on light duties, but as there was no position for her, she applied for Employment Insurance. She said that since the active rehabilitation program ended in April 2007 she has continued with the stretches and other exercises at home and has gone to physiotherapy. She also said that at the end of the program she did go into the pool and did kicking. She said she could not do the butterfly stroke, but admitted she could get a workout by swimming. She also resumed hiking and went to the gym to exercise and do active physiotherapy until her 30 day pass ran out. She can lift weights but not as heavy as before the accident and she cannot use some of the machines as she did before. She also confirmed that she drove for the first month after the accident and then found it difficult and uncomfortable to do so, at which time her daughter took over taking her son to school and driving to the grocery store. However, the plaintiff then resumed driving.
49  The plaintiff agreed that she saw Dr. Wardill in August 2007 because Dr. Ticea was not available. She needed a note for the welding program to confirm that she was well enough to take the course. However, the plaintiff denies telling Dr. Wardill that she was completely recovered. When she was shown the note from Dr. Wardill dated August 2, 2007, she recalled that she had gone back to Dr. Wardill a day later to get a further note that specified she was physically able to do the duties of a welder.
50  She agreed that several weeks later she injured her right shoulder while playing with her son on the monkey bars for which she also saw her doctor. She was prescribed pain medication including Selebrex, Tylenol 3, and Naproxen and was then referred to physiotherapy for her right shoulder.
51  In terms of getting her left breast implant replaced, the plaintiff indicated that she did contact the plastic surgeon in Florida who performed the surgery, and she understood that for Mentor implants a person has to buy a warranty with the implants. The warranty only covers the cost of the replacement implant itself. The surgeon suggested to her that she have her surgery done in British Columbia because of all the associated costs. She agreed that she had not looked into the costs of accommodations and flights to Florida to have the replacement surgery performed there.
Dr. Ross Horton, plastic surgeon
52  Dr. Horton, a physician with specialty in plastic and reconstructive surgery, first saw the plaintiff on October 31, 2006, and then on four further occasions prior to trial.
53  According to his report, dated March 6, 2008, Dr. Horton noted the following upon his first examination of the plaintiff's left breast on October 31, 2006:
On examination in the office, she was found to have a D cup size breast on the right side. The breast was soft and non-tender. There was a well-healed periareolar scar. The implant was palpable and had a capsular contracture of a Baker II/IV level. Examination of the left side revealed that there is an obvious asymmetry with a lack of superior fullness. The implant was not palpable. There was a retraction of the areola with muscle contraction. There was a well-healed periareolar scar. There was a 4 centimeter area just superior to the areola which was very tender and an obvious palpable mass within the breast tissue.
It is my impression in seeing her that she had a ruptured saline implant on the left side. As well as fat necrosis on the left side due to a blow to the left breast. [sic] I arranged for her to have a mammogram. This was done on November 17, 2006, which revealed, "collapsed left subgladular saline implant. Fat necrosis with cluster of adjacent dystrophic calcification at 12 o'clock. Follow up left breast mammogram is suggested in six months to reassess the calcification and fatty necrosis." This mammogram correlated with the ultra sound done on October 11, 2006, which suggested of a traumatic implant rupture. The mammogram also confirmed the clinical impression of the fat necrosis.
54  Dr. Horton came to the following conclusion in his report:
In conclusion this patient has had a blow to the left chest secondary to a motor vehicle accident which has resulted in force significant enough to rupture the saline implant and to cause some fat necrosis to the left breast. Although the fat necrosis has improved, she has been left with a ruptured implant. This will leave her with a permanent disability with breast asymmetry. At some point in time she should have the ruptured implant removed and replaced with a new intact implant. This may be complicated somewhat due to the additional scarring to the left breast subsequent to the injury. I would expect that when she does undergo the correction of the left breast deformity, she will require a general anaesthetic done under a daycare procedure and will require 2-3 weeks recovery for this. Despite the corrective surgery she may still have some permanent residual asymmetry of the breasts.
55  In an update to his report dated September 22, 2008, Dr. Horton stated the following:
She had an MRI done on November 17, 2006, which revealed a collapsed left subglandular saline implant as well as fat necrosis adjacent to the implant. While there are many causes of implant rupture, trauma to the chest is certainly known to be one of these. The fat necrosis on the MRI suggests that there was significant left breast trauma. Since I did not examine her before her accident I can only assume she had an intact implant before the accident.
[...]
Removal of the implant and examination of the implant may or may not collaborate the trauma.
56  In his direct examination, Dr. Horton explained that with age natural breasts sag and there is a lack of projection in the upper half of the breast. Implants restore the breasts. According to Dr. Horton, an experienced plastic surgeon is able to distinguish between an implant and a natural breast.
57  A saline breast implant involves implanting a silicone bag with a small valve into which the physician injects the saline to create volume, the saline being the same as used for intravenous fluids. If the implant leaks saline, the body absorbs it.
58  Dr. Horton also explained that the fat necrosis he observed on the left side of the plaintiff's chest is "fat death" that occurs as a result of a tissue injury in which some of the cells die. He said that fat necrosis is associated with trauma and that it is commonly seen in thighs or buttocks.
59  Dr. Horton's interpretation of the plaintiff's mammogram results were that they revealed a sub-glandular collapsed implant, which means a ruptured breast implant that has shrunken down because of compression forces. He indicated that when he first examined the plaintiff's left breast he observed the lack of fullness and found that he could not palpate the implant. He said that the fact that he noted she had a mass near the left areola meant that she had experienced enough trauma to rupture the implant and to have the fat die, thus forming a four centimetre lump of scar tissue.
60  Dr. Horton then explained the procedure, involving a series of injections, which he used to try to reduce the size of the lump of necrotic scar tissue in the plaintiff's left breast. He indicated that without the injections to soften the lump it would tend to calcify and then would have to be cut out. Generally, he said that he would not want to make an incision on the upper part of the plaintiff's left breast as large as a golf ball to remove the lump, which is how he referred to the initial size of the lump. Thus, he set about to reduce its size so that by February 28, 2007, with the injections, he considered she had improved to the point that the implant could be replaced. In terms of timing of the replacement surgery, Dr. Horton said that an earlier time is better, but he declined to say optimal.
61  In terms of the outcome of the replacement surgery, Dr. Horton indicated that residual asymmetry could occur as the scar tissue remaining in the plaintiff's left breast would probably have to be cut out with the insertion of the new implant, and this could affect healing such that the breast size with the new implant may not be exactly the same.
62  On cross-examination Dr. Horton agreed that there were all kinds of circumstances in which implants may rupture, including by spontaneous leaking due to a faulty product or improper surgical procedures. He indicated that he was familiar with the Mentor type of implants used by the plaintiff and had used them in the past, although he now preferred a different brand. With regards to Mentor products, Dr. Horton indicated that the spontaneous leak rate is between one and five percent, and that would have been the rate prior to May 2005, when the plaintiff had her augmentation surgery. In the present case, Dr. Horton said that he does not know where the source of the leak is and upon removal the implant is sent back to the manufacturer. He assumes that a Mentor implant has a warranty and if the implant is defective the manufacturer provides a new implant. He said usually in such circumstances the original surgeon will do the replacement surgery without charge.
63  When asked about his conclusion in this case that the force of the accident ruptured the implant, Dr. Horton agreed that was an assumption on his part, although he said he had seen many patients who had been in traffic accidents. Key to his finding that the plaintiff's left breast implant ruptured in the accident was the presence of the fat necrosis. He indicated without that, the deflation of the implant could have been spontaneous, but with the presence of the necrotic fat there was "a pretty good likelihood" the deflation was caused by trauma.
64  Dr. Horton agreed that without replacement the plaintiff has a permanent disability, and with replacement the plaintiff may also have a permanent disability, but the latter was difficult to determine at this point. He also agreed that it was not uncommon for non-augmented breasts to be asymmetrical, and that even when augmentation surgery goes as planned some asymmetry may occur.
65  Dr. Horton impressed the Court as a highly knowledgeable, professional, and honest witness. I accept all of his testimony without hesitation.
Dr. Cremona Ticea, the plaintiff's family physician
66  Dr. Ticea, a specialist in general family medicine, saw the plaintiff on a number of occasions through the Kensington Medical Clinic, including with regards to injuries related to the accident and other concerns. Interspersed between the appointments the plaintiff had with Dr. Ticea were appointments with other doctors in the clinic. Dr. Ticea indicated that she relied on entries to the plaintiff's chart made by the other doctors.
67  Initially, after the accident the plaintiff saw Dr. Shehata, and then she moved to the Kensington Clinic, where on November 1, 2006, she first saw Dr. Symon.
68  In her testimony, Dr. Ticea reviewed the various appointments she had with the plaintiff starting on November 7, 2006, when she noted that the plaintiff had seen Dr. Horton due the ruptured left breast implant and fat necrosis. She also noted that the plaintiff had been off work for a week and reviewed the medication the plaintiff was taking for pain: Toradol and Tylenol. The plaintiff indicated to her that the pain her left arm and left breast was constant. The plaintiff's range of motion in her neck was full but she had pain on the right side with all motions. Her range of motion in her shoulders was full. Dr. Ticea's assessment was that the plaintiff was suffering from a ruptured breast implant and whiplash associated disorder. The plaintiff was to transfer her medical records, attend physiotherapy and come back in a week.
69  When Dr. Ticea saw the plaintiff on November 21, 2006, she diagnosed left arm strain and the ruptured left breast implant and recommended three weeks off work with continued physiotherapy. She provided a note indicating that the plaintiff was unable to work for medical reasons related to the accident from November 21 to December 15, 2006.
70  Dr. Ticea next saw the plaintiff on November 28, 2006, for follow up and to coordinate an appointment with Dr. Horton on December 1, 2006, for an evaluation of the ruptured implant. Dr. Ticea signed an Employment Insurance form for the plaintiff that applied until the end of January 2007. She recommended that the plaintiff have physiotherapy twice a week.
71  Dr. Ticea saw the plaintiff on December 14, 2006, by which time she had seen Dr. Horton and had a steroid injection in the lump in her breast. When Dr. Ticea examined the plaintiff she noted that she had a reduced range of motion in her left wrist, which was stiff, that her left hand was weaker, and she had pain in her left shoulder joint. The plaintiff was advised to continue physiotherapy, she was to attend to have her left shoulder x-rayed, and if that was negative, she was to have nerve conduction studies done. In addition to the other medication she was taking she was to take Flexeril, a muscle relaxant, three times a day.
72  Dr. Ticea saw the plaintiff on January 11, 2007, at which time she was still off work, unable to work with her left arm. She considered the plaintiff to be worse since she had last seen her, as her wrist was stiff and she had pain coming from her shoulder. The plaintiff advised that she had been in hospital for migraines, and had been given a head scan, which was normal. She had been given a nasal spray called Axert and a trial of Eletriptan, both migraine medications. She was on an antihypertensive medication for fluid retention from the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Dr. Ticea recommended physiotherapy and nerve conduction studies.
73  When Dr. Ticea saw the plaintiff on January 19, 2007, she noted three reasons for the visit: the first to do with the accident and the lump in the plaintiff's left breast that required another steroid injection by Dr. Horton; the second to do with migraines; and the third regarding counselling for divorce and the accident. Dr. Ticea said that she did not treat the plaintiff for depression, but noted that Dr. Wardill had referred her to Dr. Rana, a psychiatrist who works out of their clinic.
74  On February 5, 2007, Dr. Ticea saw the plaintiff because she needed a note for work. She reported feeling similar pain in the left side of her neck, left arm and spoke of changing work. Dr. Ticea recommended that the plaintiff not work until February 28, 2007, when she was next scheduled to see Dr. Horton.
75  On February 8, 2007, the plaintiff attended to see Dr. Ticea to obtain a prescription for active rehabilitation which was to be approved by ICBC.
76  On March 8, 2007, Dr. Ticea saw the plaintiff for an assessment prior to her starting active rehabilitation. The plaintiff advised that she was having two to three migraines per month, and that she was taking a migraine medication, Relpax. The plaintiff reported that she had seen Dr. Horton the prior week and the breast lump was 'nice and soft' and that if ICBC paid, she was going to replace the saline implant. The nerve conduction studies were negative, having been conducted by a neurologist, Dr. Bozek. Dr. Ticea recommended a CT scan of the plaintiff's cervical spine.
77  On March 21, 2007, Dr. Ticea saw the plaintiff, who had experienced a bad migraine for several days. The plaintiff had been to a hospital emergency department that day and given morphine and another migraine medication to try. She continued to be unable to work and Dr. Ticea provided her with a note that recommended she be off work until April 21, 2007. The plaintiff also complained of experiencing panic attacks, in relation to which Dr. Ticea recommended breathing exercises and Clinazapan, in addition to prescribing Ativan sublingually as needed.
78  Dr. Ticea examined the plaintiff on April 12, 2007, for the purpose of completing a report at the request of ICBC. By this time the plaintiff had substantially completed the active rehabilitation program and it was suggested that she was ready to return to work on light duties. In the report, Dr. Ticea noted that the plaintiff's current complaints were that her left wrist was weak, and she was experiencing neck pain, migraines, left breast pain, and depression. Dr. Ticea listed the following as accident-related clinical diagnoses: left shoulder soft-tissue injuries, left wrist sprain, and ruptured left breast implant. She considered the plaintiff's upper back injuries at a Grade II in terms of severity (with Grade I indicating no physical signs and Grade IV indicating a fracture or dislocation) according to ICBC's categories on the report.
79  Dr. Ticea said that on April 12, 2007, when she completed the report, she was of the view that the injuries sustained by the plaintiff in the accident were having an impact on her ability to work full-time, as the plaintiff had advised her that she worked in a factory doing heavy lifting. Dr. Ticea recommended that the plaintiff try a gradual return to work but the plaintiff advised her that there were no light duties available at her previous employment.
80  On April 26, 2007, Dr. Ticea saw the plaintiff in relation to migraines, and for a pelvic examination. She called the plaintiff back on May 2, 2007, to provide a prescription for a symptom unrelated to the accident, at which time the plaintiff advised that she had finished the active rehabilitation program and was doing the exercises at home.
81  On May 20, 2007, Dr. Ticea saw the plaintiff in relation to migraines.
82  On July 20, 2007, Dr. Ticea saw the plaintiff in relation to the injury to her right shoulder, in relation to which she had seen another physician on July 8, 2007. She was in considerable pain on July 20, 2007, and was having trouble managing the pain with Naproxen and was unable to take Tylenol 3. It was shortly after this that Dr. Ticea noted the plaintiff saw Dr. Wardill and sought the note saying she was completely recovered from the accident.
83  On August 16, 2007, Dr. Ticea saw the plaintiff to review the x-ray of her right shoulder.
84  On August 24, 2007, Dr. Ticea saw the plaintiff in relation to migraines and she reported that she had been seen in the Emergency Department the previous night. She was taking Topamax for migraines and would continue to do so. She was also taking Ativan sublingually, and Melatonin for insomnia.
85  On September 7, 2007, Dr. Ticea again saw the plaintiff, who complained of excruciating pain in her left shoulder related to the accident. Dr. Ticea noted that the plaintiff advised that Tylenol 3 helped.
86  The plaintiff then saw Dr. Ticea for four appointments unrelated to the injuries from the accident between September 19, 2007, and October 24, 2007.
87  Dr. Ticea last saw the plaintiff on December 4, 2007, in relation to continuing problems arising from the accident regarding her left breast and left wrist.
88  On January 8, 2008, Dr. Ticea saw the plaintiff for tendonitis in her right shoulder, for which she was to continue with physiotherapy and take Advil as needed. Dr. Ticea noted that the plaintiff had experienced the worst month of her life due to school problems. She was to continue to take Adivan and Topamax.
89  As Dr. Ticea had been away until recently, she examined the plaintiff on July 24, 2009, before testifying. Prior to that Dr. Ticea had not seen the plaintiff for a year. At the recent examination of the plaintiff Dr. Ticea advised that the plaintiff was still complaining of difficulties arising from the accident. Dr. Ticea noted that the plaintiff had a decreased range of motion in her neck and in her left shoulder and arm, as well as asymmetry in breast size, with her left breast being smaller than her right. She noted that the plaintiff's right shoulder was not bothering her.
Marion Nihls, physiotherapist
90  Ms. Nihls, a physiotherapist with a specialty in muscular skeletal rehabilitation, treated the plaintiff from November 22, 2006, to April 20, 2007. She described her treatment sessions with the plaintiff and reviewed the detailed notes she made of each visit.
91  During her initial assessment of the plaintiff on November 22, 2006, Ms. Nihls noted that the plaintiff's left breast was softer and lower than her right, and that she complained of pain in her left shoulder and upper arm, as well as numbness in both hands. The plaintiff described no prior injury to her neck and back but did report a long history of migraine headaches, including severe ones every three to six months that required her to attend a hospital emergency for treatment. During the physical examination of the plaintiff Ms. Nihls noted that there was a muscle spasm between her C 4 and C 6 vertebrae, some weakness between the fourth and fifth fingers on her left hand, and some stiffness and pain in T 4 to T 9 region of the thoracic spine.
92  Ms. Nihls saw the plaintiff again on November 24, 2006, at which time she complained of increased soreness and localized pain in the left anterior of her shoulder and down her arm. On November 29, 2006, the plaintiff advised that her shoulder had improved after the prior treatment. On November 30, 2006, the plaintiff cancelled her appointment because of a migraine headache. On December 5, 2006, she apparently called to advise that she was ceasing treatment until ICBC covered the cost because she could not afford to continue.
93  The plaintiff resumed physiotherapy on February 27, 2007, at which time she advised she was experiencing frequent migraines, right neck stiffness, pain in her left arm to her hand, and stiffness and trouble grasping with her left hand. She also advised of a burning sensation in her left breast and that the breast lump was less sore and softer after two injections from Dr. Horton. The plaintiff attended several sessions in early March 2007 before she commenced more frequent attendances as part of the active rehabilitation program that commenced March 8, 2007.
94  As the active rehabilitation program progressed Ms. Nihls noted improvement in relation to the plaintiff's neck, left shoulder and arm, and gradually in relation to her left wrist. Ms. Nihls noted in her interim report, dated April 5, 2007, that the plaintiff had improved in terms of her strength and level of functional activity. She was cleared for a graduated return to work as of April 18, 2007, but had been laid off, and was planning to go to BCIT in August.
95  The last time Ms. Nihls treated the plaintiff was April 20, 2007, at which time she noted that her cervical spine had improved but she continued to feel tightness on the right side at the base of the neck with left neck rotation. Ms. Nihls manipulated the T 5 area of the spine between the shoulder blades and the muscles on the right side of the neck. Thereafter, she was seen by another physiotherapist.
96  Ms. Nihls followed up with the plaintiff by calling her at home on May 29, 2007, which she reported upon in her letter to ICBC of the same date. In that letter Ms. Nihls notes "I spoke with Lisa today and she reported she is managing well and is virtually pain free".
John J. Banks, rehabilitation consultant
97  Mr. Banks is a rehabilitation consultant with a specialty in vocational evaluation and work capacity assessment. He conducted a work capacity assessment of the plaintiff on August 18, 2008. In his detailed report he assessed many different aspects of the plaintiff's physical ability to perform many tasks and activities related to her physical ability to work.
98  Mr. Banks had the following specific observations in his report regarding the plaintiff's ability to sit for periods of time:
Ms. Gregory demonstrated the ability to continuously sit for variable periods of time during the assessment, ranging from 33 minutes while involved in upper extremity static strength testing activities, to 2 hours during the intake interview. Ms. Gregory did not stand or stretch during the seated intake interview. No shifting of position was noted while seated however; Ms. Gregory reported increased neck and left wrist discomfort at the completion of 120 minutes of sustained sitting during the intake interview, and increased left wrist discomfort change was reported following 33 minutes of continuous sitting while participating in repetitive upper extremity tasks towards the end of the assessment day. Overall, Ms. Gregory's tolerance for brief duration and prolonged sitting was rated as functional, with increased left wrist discomfort noted with upper extremity use while seated.
99  In relation to the plaintiff's ability to reach overhead in terms of discomfort he noted the following:
Ms. Gregory demonstrated marginally functional tolerances for sustained overhead reaching while standing, with increased subjective neck discomfort reported while working for prolonged periods of time with her arms extended overhead while standing. Repetitive forward and overhead reaching activities were performed at a level of speed and efficiency consistent with competitive employment standards. She demonstrated functional unilateral hand dexterity, scoring within the above competitive employment standards using the left and right hands.
100  Mr. Banks did observe some weakness in the plaintiff's left hand that he noted as follows:
No weakness was noted in the right or left hands for grasping/holding during bilateral lifting and carrying activities in the range from 10-40 pounds however; biomechanical compensation was noted in the left hand when lifting and carrying in excess of this range. Functional isometric grip strength was measured in the MEDIUM strength range for the right and left hands. Isometric pinch strength was also measured in the MEDIUM strength range for both hands during key grip and 3-point pinch assessment, when compared to industrial standards.
101  Mr. Banks concluded as following about the plaintiff's overall physical condition:
From a vocational perspective, the results of the current assessment suggest Ms. Gregory has demonstrated sufficient body dexterity and limb coordination but has not demonstrated sufficient strength to tolerate all of the physical demands of her previous job as a meat packer (NOC# 9462.2: PA=V2, C0, H1, B2, L1, S4), including the related occupations of meat roll tier, meat portion cutter, poultry preparer, meat cutter, bench woman, meat trimmer and meat boner. These occupations are considered by the NOC to be HEAVY (S4) strength occupations, with work activities involving lifting, carrying, pushing, pulling and handling loads greater than 20 kg (44 pounds); a body dexterity requirement for standing and/or walking (B2) and; a requirement for upper limb coordination (L1). Specific limitations relate to a reduced tolerance for repetitively lifting at a HEAVY (S4) strength level, especially above shoulder height, with biomechanical breakdown noted when lifting and carrying weights in excess of 40 pounds. Similarly, Ms. Gregory has exhibited limitations on activities requiring pushing or weight bearing with the left wrist as measured during isometric testing on the ERGOS work simulator, as well as a reduced tolerance for pinching and gripping strength. This places her functional ability for pushing, pinching and gripping in the MEDIUM (S#) strength range, with limitations in functional frequency of loading the left wrist.
The results of assessment indicate that Ms. Gregory currently is able to perform her current job duties as a new construction cleaner (NOC# 6661: PA=V2, C0, H1, B4, L1, S3), including the related occupations of building cleaner, cleaner, cleaning woman light duty cleaner, residence cleaner and sweeper. These occupations are considered by the NOC to be MEDIUM (S3) strength occupations, with work activities involving lifting, carrying, pushing, pulling and handling loads from 10 kg (22 pounds) to 20 kg (44 pounds); a body dexterity requirement for sitting, standing and/or walking as well as other body positions such as stooping kneeling and crouching (B2) and; a requirement for upper limb coordination (L1).
Ms. Gregory's ability to perform in her current job duties is dependent on her ability to be able to change position during the work day. This has allowed her to tolerate her job duties especially with her limited ability to load the left wrist.
102  In his testimony, Mr. Banks reviewed the findings in his report. He focused on the plaintiff's weaknesses, which included that she could not maintain a functional lateral grasp with her left hand that forced her to use her wrist or ulna. He noted signs of neck strain with sitting beyond 120 minutes. He found the plaintiff had no limitations in terms of her use of her right hand, but in relation to her left hand within two minutes she would be compensating for limitations. According to Mr. Banks if there is a significant difference in a person's ability to pronate and supinate a hand it is indicative of a functional limitation. In the plaintiff's case the pronation of left hand was compromised and she experienced pain in her elbow and in a distribution down the side of her left hand.
103  On cross-examination, Mr. Banks indicated that in his report, when he states that the pronation and supination of her hand were good, that was without loading the hands. He agreed that he had not assessed the plaintiff prior to accident and that he did not know what her limitations were prior to it. He agreed that the National Occupational Classification ("NOC") definitions of the job requirements for a meat packer and a new construction cleaner were not job specific and so they may not apply to the job that the plaintiff was doing at Hill's. He confirmed that he terminated dynamic lifting because the plaintiff was showing weakness on her left side. In terms of his testing for the range of motion in both of the plaintiff's shoulders, Mr. Banks considered both shoulders were functional but he noted that if the plaintiff used her left shoulder there was mild recruitment of other muscles to help. In terms of neck flexion, Mr. Banks noted that while performing lateral flexion there was pulling on the right when bending to the left.
Darren Benning, economist
104  Mr. Benning, an economist, was qualified to provide expert opinion evidence in the area of past and future income loss. His report assumes that the plaintiff, absent the accident, would have completed the training necessary to work as a welder and thereafter would have pursued employment in that occupation through to an assumed retirement at no later than age 65 years. It also assumes that as a result of the accident the plaintiff would continue what was her current employment at Transparent Glazing, working 40 hours per week at a wage rate of <damage type = "other">$15.50</damage> per hour. In the alternative, he assumed that the plaintiff will retain and seek employment as a child and youth care counsellor. Mr. Benning included various negative contingencies in his calculations including non-participation in the labour force, unemployment, working less than fulltime, and premature death. The plaintiff was 43 years old at the time he wrote his report.
105  Mr. Benning estimates future loss of employment income with the plaintiff continuing with employment at Transparent Glazing or a comparable employer as compared to working as a welder to be <damage type = "other">$323,481</damage>. In the event that she were to continue after the accident as a child and youth care counsellor as opposed to a welder, and assuming two years training in relation to the former, he estimates her future loss of employment income to be <damage type = "other">$341,089</damage>.
106  It is relevant to note that Mr. Benning reviewed the plaintiff's income: for 2003 and 2004 -- <damage type = "other">$1</damage> per year; for 2005 -- <damage type = "other">$6,872</damage> (of which <damage type = "other">$4,272</damage> was reported as T4 Earnings and <damage type = "other">$2,600</damage> was Other Employment Income); for 2006 -- <damage type = "other">$18,497</damage> (primarily T4 Earnings); for 2007 -- $20,619 (all but $95 of which was from Employment Insurance benefits); and for 2008 -- $22,994 (of which $11,644 was reported as T4 Earnings, $7,238 was Other Employment Income, and $4,112 was from Employment Insurance benefits). Mr. Benning reviewed the plaintiff's recent employment at Vedder Steel from April 2 to April 23, 2008, her employment at Fraser Ridge Industries as a construction site cleaner between April 25 and May 14, 2008, followed by her employment at Transparent Glazing as a delivery driver, which commenced in September 2008. He reports that as of April 20, 2009, when he wrote his report, the plaintiff was on a leave of absence from Transparent Glazing to care for her son that was anticipated to last four to six weeks.
107  On cross-examination, Mr. Benning admitted that his calculations were based on a wage rate as a welder of <damage type = "other">$20</damage> per hour, and to the extent she was earning $15 per hour at Vedder Steel he overestimated her past loss. He said that his census data was based on male welders as there is insufficient data available for female welders. He agreed that typically women do have lower career earnings influenced by time out for child rearing, less tenure and less experience, and the fact that men tend to work more hours per week than women even in the same type of employment. As there was no evidence that the plaintiff would get her trade certificate in welding he used data for all welders.
Chandra Mayoh, the plaintiff's daughter
108  Chandra Mayoh, the plaintiff's daughter ("Chandra"), is 20 years old. She is in her second year pursuing a Bachelor of Arts with a major in criminology. She lives with her mother and was aware of the accident. She recalled seeing her mother the day of the accident when she was complaining about pain in her neck and left shoulder and arm. She thought that her mother took a couple of days off work because her arm was hurting and then she went back to work. Chandra recalled that her mother found the pain in her left arm to be too much, so she applied for medical leave from work for a few months.
109  Chandra recalled that as her mother's pain worsened, she started to get migraines from the tension in her neck, and to experience sharp pain in her left breast. She described her mother asking her to look at the latter's left breast when she was naked. Chandra said that she saw that her mother's left breast had changed in size and that it was "now flat" and there was a significant size difference between her left and right breasts. She said that her mother is still bothered by this and that she still experiences pain and discomfort in both her left arm and left breast. She has seen her mother get a sharp pain and lean over and grab her arm. She said her mother has to rest and not use her arm. She understood her mother to take Tylenol and Aspirin and Topamax for her migraines and that she has lost track of the number of doctors her mother has attended. She confirmed that her mother had a very bad migraine after the prior day in court, and she had to take her to the hospital for a shot to stop her vomiting. She indicated that her mother started to take Topamax for migraines after the accident because she was getting migraines several times a week, whereas before the accident her mother was getting migraines once a month or once every couple of months.
110  Chandra said that she does not swim with her mother anymore as her mother cannot rotate her arm, and her mother does not "rough house" with her little brother because that hurts her arm. She said her mother has gained 15 pounds since she has stopped swimming.
111  Chandra indicated that prior to the accident her mother did the house cleaning but now she helps out by moving everything that has to be moved. Chandra said she helps because she is older and because her mother is in pain.
112  Chandra has also noticed that her mother is more stressed and less social since the accident. She says her mother goes out less with friends now and that she feels down. She recalled that after her rehabilitation program her mother's injuries got better but then they seemed to return.
113  On cross-examination, Chandra indicated that prior to the accident she was in high school and would keep her own room clean and do her dishes. She did not take her brother to school as she was in high school herself.
Irene Mayoh, the plaintiff's mother
114  Ms. Mayoh, a registered nurse with over 30 years' experience, testified in relation to her daughter, the plaintiff. Ms. Mayoh said that as a young woman the plaintiff was very physically active. She was a competitive swimmer, had many friends, and seemed to be a very happy person. Prior to the accident, Ms. Mayoh indicated that the plaintiff had no serious health problems except migraines, which she managed. To Ms. Mayoh her daughter seemed fine, busy with her children, doing her own house work that included washing walls and vacuuming, and shopping for and carrying the groceries for her family. She recalled that the plaintiff wore clothing in a size three or four, whereas since the accident she wears a size 10 to 12. She believes that the plaintiff has gained about 30 pounds since the accident. Ms. Mayoh recalled that at age 26 or 27 the plaintiff had surgery for cervical cancer.
115  Ms. Mayoh recalled that the plaintiff called her the day of the accident and that she saw her about two weeks afterwards. At that time, Ms. Mayoh recalled that the plaintiff complained of pain in her neck and down her left arm, and weakness in her left wrist. The plaintiff moved her head tentatively and complained of pain in her left shoulder and wrist when she lifted things.
116  Ms. Mayoh testified that she noticed that the plaintiff's injuries from the accident did not seem to improve. They appeared to be worsening and came to affect her mental state. She observed the plaintiff to become stressed out and increasingly worried about how she was going to provide for her children. The plaintiff continued to complain of pain at the back of her neck, down her left shoulder and into her left wrist. She also observed that the plaintiff still had trouble putting on her seat belt.
117  Ms. Mayoh indicated that she was aware that the plaintiff had breast augmentation surgery in 2005. She also knew of the plaintiff's problem with the left implant bursting "pretty quick right after the accident" after she had noticed it while taking a shower. Ms. Mayoh indicated that the plaintiff's left breast is really deformed as it resembles "a bag with nothing in it." She also indicated that she was not aware of her daughter having any problems with her breasts or any deformities in her breasts prior to the accident. Ms. Mayoh said that after the accident she helped the plaintiff as much as she could in terms of helping with her grandson and with household chores, including laundry, cleaning and cooking. She indicated that she does not do as much at present but that she still prepares dinner for the plaintiff and her family about twice a month. Ms. Mayoh said that she did not know the cost of repairing the plaintiff's left breast, and that her daughter had not asked her for money for that purpose.
118  On cross-examination Ms. Mayoh said that she had never gone with the plaintiff to a hospital emergency department for treatment for the latter's migraines, but she was aware that her daughter had done so. Ms. Mayoh said she was with the plaintiff in 2005 for a month when the latter had the breast implant surgery and changed the dressings for her. She confirmed that she had seen the plaintiff's bare breasts since the surgery and more recently since the accident.
Fred Chaloner, family friend
119  Mr. Chaloner is a long-time family friend of the plaintiff's. In particular, his recently-deceased wife was a very close friend to the plaintiff for almost 20 years, from the time the plaintiff had her first child. He said his wife used to babysit when the plaintiff's children were young and he would go over and help her with chores.
120  Mr. Chaloner said that he was aware that the plaintiff was in an accident in 2006 but said she never elaborated on the details. He said after 2006 she was fairly active in terms of swimming and other activities. He encouraged her to go into welding. He said she was enthusiastic about welding and did not need a lot of encouragement. He recalled that once she finished the welding course and got a job as a welder she would come over and complain that her back, shoulder and breasts were giving her trouble. She would take Tylenol and then go home. She indicated that the job at Vedder Steel was "just killing her". He noticed she had slowed down and was not as active as she had been. She seemed moodier, less upbeat, and quieter when she came over to visit. Whereas the plaintiff and his wife got along perfectly before the accident, he recalled that they had a few squabbles after it. He was aware that the plaintiff was not feeling well and that something had gone wrong with her breast. He also recalled that after she was working for the window business she would drop by to see him after work and ask for a Tylenol. She talked about having to quit that job. Mr. Chaloner's impression was that prior to the accident she was "a fireball". His view was that she was no longer that way and seemed to have slowed down a lot.
121  On cross-examination Mr. Chaloner agreed that while his wife had cancer and during the times when the plaintiff seemed moody, he was busy working, and thus, did not interfere. He recalled that the plaintiff would complain about her shoulder and her back and always talked about trying to get the money to pay for cortisone shots. He understood she had to leave her employment as her shoulder would not take it.
Evidence called on behalf of the defendant
Dustin Penner, the defendant
122  Mr. Penner testified that he was travelling east in his Volkswagen in stop and go traffic on the Mary Hill bypass between 2 and 4 p.m. on September 11, 2006, when he noticed an accident on the other side of the road. It distracted him and when he looked back it was too late for him to avoid a collision with the rear bumper of the plaintiff's vehicle directly in front of him. He estimated his speed to have been about 10 to 15 kilometres per hour when he slammed on his brakes as his vehicle stuck the plaintiff's vehicle. He recalled getting out and checking the damage, a police officer attending to take statements, and that he received a ticket for several infractions. He said that he did not talk to the driver of the other vehicle at the scene.
123  On cross-examination Mr. Penner admitted that he was in first gear and that 10 to 15 kilometres per hour was probably his minimum speed. He admitted that he had his foot off the clutch and had just begun to accelerate before he hit the brake. He admitted that he could have been travelling up to a speed of 25 kilometres per hour at that point.
Leonard Solstad, an estimator with ICBC
124  Mr. Solstad, an estimator with ICBC, examined the defendant's vehicle on November 7, 2006, and estimated the amount of damage and the costs of repair. Mr. Solstad considered the damage to the Volkswagen to be cosmetic damage to the left side and centre of the hood, which had buckled. The grille was broken and had already been replaced by the defendant. The left signal light was broken and there was some damage to the center and front of the left bumper. He estimated the cost of repair to be <damage type = "other">$1,069.76</damage>. He estimated that the cost of the grille repaired directly by the defendant to be from $36 upwards depending on the quality of the replacement part.
Dr. Karen Wardill, a physician in the same clinic as Dr. Ticea
125  Counsel for the defendant tendered the video deposition evidence of Dr. Wardill at trial. She testified that she saw the plaintiff on several occasions at the Kensington Clinic where Dr. Ticea also worked. Dr. Wardill recalled that she saw the plaintiff on August 2 and again on August 3, 2007, and then on a number of subsequent occasions.
126  On August 2, 2007, Dr. Wardill had a discussion with the plaintiff because she wanted a note saying she was fully recovered from the accident and able to return to work. Dr. Wardill provided the note. The next day she saw the plaintiff again when she provided a reworded note that specifically referred to the plaintiff as physically able to perform all the duties of a welder.
127  Dr. Wardill recalled that she also treated the plaintiff on several occasions later in August 2007 for an injury to the plaintiff's right shoulder (first treated in July 2007), for which she prescribed Tylenol 3. She again saw the plaintiff on November 11, 2007, for "chronic shoulder tendonitis" and again on July 25, 2008, for anxiety and panic attacks, as well as a complaint of stiffness in her left wrist. On October 18, 2008, she referred the plaintiff to a psychiatrist.
128  On cross-examination, Dr. Wardill agreed, based on the notes on her file, that she did not physically examine the plaintiff on August 2, 2007. Therefore, her notation referencing the plaintiff's return to work was based on what the plaintiff told her. She recalled that the purpose of the visit was for the plaintiff to obtain a note permitting her to return to work and the purpose of the visit the next day was to obtain a reworded note. Dr. Wardill indicated that she could not recall what kind of work the plaintiff was returning to.
Findings as to Reliability and Credibility
129  First, I will set out my findings in relation to the testimony of the plaintiff.
130  At trial the plaintiff did her best to be a reliable and credible witness. She presented as an unsophisticated, rather naive person who was generally truthful, at times against her own interest. It is clear that her life preceding the accident and since is very stressful for many reasons unrelated to the accident. However, the accident has added to her stress and her financial concerns as it interrupted and ultimately caused her to lose her employment at Hill's.
131  I accept that from the accident until September 2007, a period of 12 months, the plaintiff experienced considerable pain, discomfort, weakness, and limitations on movement in relation to the soft tissue injuries to her neck and left arm and shoulder as she described. This time frame recognizes the plaintiff's attendances on Dr. Wardill in early August 2007 and a further visit to Dr. Ticea on September 7, 2007, when she complained of pain and discomfort in relation to injuries sustained in the accident. It also takes into account a further period of time to recover after the plaintiff reported to Ms. Nihls on May 29, 2007, that she was "managing well" and was "virtually pain free".
132  I also accept that the plaintiff experienced considerable additional pain and discomfort associated with the injury to her left breast and the treatment of the necrotic fat, as well as the ongoing disfigurement. I do not doubt that for the plaintiff to continue to live with the ruptured left breast implant has added considerable stress and pain to an already complicated and difficult life.
133  However, I find that the plaintiff also was prone to exaggerate the severity and duration of some of her symptoms, including the level of pain and the degree of incapacity she experienced, particularly in relation to her migraines. If the migraines had truly approached the frequency and severity she described after the accident, she would have been unable to function at all. On the totality of the evidence I do not accept that injuries she sustained in the accident exacerbated her migraines to the extent she described, or that the migraines she experienced after September 2007 to the present are related to the accident.
134  I accept that the injury to her left breast, the trauma that produced the lump of necrotic far and the ruptured implant, was caused by the accident as I will explain later. I accept the plaintiff's evidence that the pain, the burning, tingling, and electrical sensations that she has experienced in her left breast, and the ongoing discomfort, worry, stress, humiliation and lack of self-confidence, due to trying to go about her daily life with a collapsed breast implant still in her chest are considerable.
135  I remain somewhat puzzled as to how it was that the Medical Services Plan was not called upon to cover the removal of the collapsed implant, or why the plaintiff was not able to borrow sufficient funds in the past three years to have the surgery to replace it, either from her mother, other family members, or even from her good family friend, Mr. Chaloner, in the event that she truly could not afford to pay for it herself. However, this matter was not canvassed in any detail before the Court, except that the plaintiff made it clear that she was of very limited means when it came to supporting herself and her children.
136  In terms of the plaintiff's testimony about her employment and aspiration to become a welder, I accept that she had the goal to become a welder, and was determined to take the training and try it. However, it is significant in my view that the plaintiff's planning to take the welding course commenced about six months prior to August 2007, which means that practically speaking she anticipated being able to take it as early as January 2007. This course was further training that she chose to do and it obviously required significant physical strength. It seems that she was prepared to undertake the course with a collapsed breast implant in her chest. She pursued funding to support her training and saw Dr. Wardill in early August 2007, not once but twice, to get the appropriately-worded note to indicate that she was recovered from the accident to the extent she could do the heavy physical work of a welder.
137  I do not accept based on her employment history prior to the accident, to the extent it was disclosed, or her conduct after she took the course and worked for less than a month as a welder at Vedder Steel, that she was committed to a long-term future career in welding, or indeed, in any particular occupation or employment. Her pre- and post-accident employment history as revealed by the evidence does not support any such inference. Three weeks on the job as a welder at Vedder Steel does not demonstrate commitment to a career in welding, particularly when the next job the plaintiff sought and obtained had nothing to do with welding.
138  The only reasonable inference to be drawn from her conduct is that, based on how she felt in August 2007 and after September 7, 2007, when she saw Dr. Ticea for accident-related pain, is that she was sufficiently recovered to undertake such training. This is so even after the injury to her right shoulder in July 2007 that required significant medication for pain and physiotherapy. I find that logically this must mean she was no longer suffering from the considerable ill effects she attributed to the accident, except in relation to her left breast, which she had decided to endure.
139  I further find that the plaintiff's evidence about an increased intensity and frequency of migraine headaches after the accident is unreliable, as is her evidence about the level of physical activity she was able to sustain, as shown in her contradictory testimony about being able to go swimming. I am of the view that her accident-related injuries were compounded by the considerable stress and worry in her life related to being able to care for and be the sole supporting parent of her children, particularly her young son. My impression is that these stresses, unrelated to the accident, compounded by the discomfort and worry caused by her ruptured breast implant and how she was going to manage its repair, had a significant impact on her being able to deal with the physical and mental stresses of the work place. I find they contributed to her exaggeration of the severity and frequency of her migraine headaches after the accident. To accept her evidence as to her migraine headaches after the accident would essentially mean that she was completely debilitated by them, which obviously she was not. I do, however, accept that the pain from her soft-tissue injuries and her ruptured implant caused some increase in the intensity and frequency of her migraine headaches from the date of the accident to September 2007.
140  I also accept the plaintiff's testimony regarding her observations in relation to her ruptured breast implant and the significant associated ongoing pain and discomfort in light of the corroborative and highly reliable, independent evidence of Dr. Horton, which I accept in its entirety.
141  In terms of the testimony of the other witnesses called on behalf of the plaintiff and the defendant I find that each testified in a reliable and credible manner, and I accept their evidence.
Findings and Analysis
Finding as to Causation Regarding the Breast Implant Rupture
142  The plaintiff submits that the evidence of the plaintiff and Dr. Horton establishes that a cause of the ruptured breast implant was the accident.
143  The defendant, on the other hand, submits that causation as between the accident and the plaintiff's ruptured breast implant has not been established.
144  The legal test for causation in civil cases was discussed by Major J. in Athey v. Leonati,  [Athey] at 466-467:
Causation is established where the plaintiff proves to the civil standard on a balance of probabilities that the defendant caused or contributed to the injury: Snell v. Farrell, ; McGhee v. National Coal Board, [1972] 3 All E.R. 1008 (H.L.).
The general, but not conclusive, test for causation is the "but for" test, which requires the plaintiff to show that the injury would not have occurred but for the negligence of the defendant: Horsley v. MacLaren, .
The "but for" test is unworkable in some circumstances, so the courts have recognized that causation is established where the defendant's negligence "materially contributed" to the occurrence of the injury: Myers v. Peel County Board of Education; , Bonnington Castings, Ltd. v. Wardlaw, [1956] 1 All E.R. 615 (H.L.); McGhee v. National Coal Board, supra. A contributing factor is material if it falls outside the de minimis range: Bonnington Castings, Ltd. v. Wardlaw, supra; see also R. v. Pinske  (B.C.C.A.), aff'd .
In Snell v. Farrell, supra, this Court recently confirmed that the plaintiff must prove that the defendant's tortious conduct caused or contributed to the plaintiff's injury. The causation test is not to be applied too rigidly. Causation need not be determined by scientific precision; as Lord Salmon stated in Alphacell Ltd. v. Woodward, [1972] 2 All E.R. 475, at p. 490, and as was quoted by Sopinka J. at p. 328, it is "essentially a practical question of fact which can best be answered by ordinary common sense". Although the burden of proof remains with the plaintiff, in some circumstances an inference of causation may be drawn from the evidence without positive scientific proof.
It is not now necessary, nor has it ever been, for the plaintiff to establish that the defendant's negligence was the sole cause of the injury. There will frequently be a myriad of other background events which were necessary preconditions to the injury occurring. [...] As long as a defendant is part of the cause of an injury, the defendant is liable, even though his act alone was not enough to create the injury. There is no basis for a reduction of liability because of the existence of other preconditions: defendants remain liable for all injuries caused or contributed to by their negligence.
145  Causation must be determined prior to the assessment of damages, and must not be confused with the rules of assessing damages once causation is established: Blackwater v. Plint,  at para. 78.
146  Applying the test set out in Athey, I must decide whether the evidence establishes that the accident caused the plaintiff's injuries to her left breast, in terms of the rupture of her breast implant and the formation of the necrotic lump, as well as the pain and other discomfort she experienced in the area of her left breast. It is not necessary that the accident be the sole cause, or that causation be established to scientific precision. To succeed the plaintiff must prove on a balance of probabilities that the accident was a contributing factor, outside the de minimis range.
147  In Wilson v. MacKay,  (S.C.) [Wilson], Dorgan J., after reviewing the judgment of Sopinka J. in Snell v. Farrell, , considered the burden of proof and the inference of causation in the context of alleged medical malpractice that resulted in breast asymmetry and scarring following breast reduction surgery. Dorgan J. stated the following at para. 89:
In summary, the plaintiff need not prove causation with scientific precision. The plaintiff may present evidence which, if believed, may lead to an inference adverse to the defendant.
The learned judge then found that the plaintiff had not discharged the onus of proof upon her, except in relation to an extra incision made to her right breast.
148  In the present case I accept the testimony of the plaintiff that prior to the accident she had symmetrical breasts after breast augmentation surgery. I accept that she noticed that she had a substantially smaller left breast about three weeks after the accident, and that since the accident she had experiencing pain and burning sensations in the area of her left breast. I further accept her evidence that at the same time she found the lump in her left breast. Several weeks later, Dr. Horton diagnosed the lump to be a lump of necrotic fat due to trauma in the area of the ruptured left breast implant. When I combine their evidence and consider that the plaintiff as the driver of a motor vehicle was wearing the usual shoulder/lap seatbelt across the area of her left upper body including her left breast, I find without hesitation that the plaintiff has established that the accident was at least a partial cause of rupture of the left breast implant and the associated complications. Thus, the defendant is liable for the injuries sustained by the plaintiff to the area of her left breast, including the rupture of the implant.
149  In relation to the soft-tissue injuries suffered by the plaintiff to her neck, left shoulder, arm and wrist caused by the accident, the defendant submits that the plaintiff was substantially recovered by August 2007 when she enrolled in the welding course. Thus, any continuing weakness, pain, or disability that the plaintiff claims continues to exist in her left arm and wrist past that time, the defendant submits is not proven to be caused or contributed to by the accident. On the totality of the evidence before me I agree with that submission, except that I find the date to be in September 2007 after her visit to Dr. Ticea on September 7, 2007. I find that the preponderance of the evidence points towards the plaintiff being substantially recovered from injuries to her neck, left shoulder, and left arm as of August 2007, when she then injured her right arm, and in any event by mid-September 2007.
150  I find that the continuing weakness in her left wrist and hand as identified by Mr. Banks is not established to be related to the accident. While he identifies this weakness and restricted motion in the plaintiff's left wrist and hand well after August 2007, there is no reliable medical evidence to support any continuing weakness and disability beyond that date as being caused or contributed to by the accident. I do not find the plaintiff to be a sufficiently accurate or reliable witness to accept her evidence that this was not a pre-existing problem or caused by some unrelated activity. It is also possible the disparity may be related to right-hand dominance, if the plaintiff is indeed right-handed. I note that Mr. Banks assessed the plaintiff on August 18, 2008, which was almost two years after the accident and after the intervening events of the plaintiff taking the welding course and attempting to work as a welder.
151  I also find that Dr. Ticea's evidence does not establish an ongoing weakness in the plaintiff's left wrist beyond September 7, 2007. This is because the plaintiff's complaints regarding pain in her neck, left shoulder, arm and wrist are only sporadic at best after this point and were in the main eclipsed by other presumably more pressing medical concerns unrelated to the accident. It is equally likely that the plaintiff's complaints of pain in relation to those areas of her body have been caused or substantially aggravated by taking the welding course and trying to work as a welder, an occupation for which she may have been not physically well-suited from the outset. I also note that the nerve conduction studies sought by Dr. Ticea in relation to injuries sustained in the accident were apparently negative. No neurological or other expert medical evidence was called to support an inference that the plaintiff's ongoing weakness in her left wrist and hand is related to the accident. It is also possible that continuing to have the ruptured left breast implant in her chest has contributed to pain in her left shoulder and arm. There is, quite simply, insufficient evidence to establish that the plaintiff's present complaints and some weakness in her left wrist and hand are related to the accident, except for her specific discomfort in the area of her left breast.
152  Therefore, I find that the plaintiff suffered soft tissue, whiplash-related injuries to her neck, left shoulder, arm and wrist in the accident and that these injuries, classified at a "Grade II" by Dr. Ticea caused her considerable pain and discomfort that abated with the active rehabilitation program she took in March and April 2007 to the point that she was substantially recovered by September 2007. Any remaining pain or residual weakness in the plaintiff's left wrist after that time is not proven to be caused in whole or in part by the accident.
153  In relation to her ruptured left breast implant, I find that the plaintiff has experienced considerable pain, discomfort, disfigurement, and mental stress and anxiety that continue to the present time.
Damage Awards Sought by the Plaintiff
154  I turn now to determine the extent of the losses suffered by the plaintiff proven to arise from the accident and the appropriate quantum of damages in relation to these losses under the various heads of damages claimed.
155  Counsel for the plaintiff submits that in this case an appropriate range of the total damages under all the headings is in the range of <damage type = "other">$506,949</damage> to <damage type = "other">$691,595</damage>. He submits that significant awards under the various heads of damages are warranted because of the debilitating and painful injuries the plaintiff sustained in the accident and their protracted impact on her life, in terms of pain, loss of enjoyment, limitations on physical exercise and housekeeping, loss of income from employment, and the loss of greater income, job security, and job satisfaction that she was unable to achieve due to being unable to work as a welder.
156  Counsel for the defendant takes a completely different view of this case. Having submitted that the plaintiff's ruptured breast implant is not proven to have been caused by the accident, and that the accident was a minor one with minimal damage to both vehicles and the only sign of physical injury to the plaintiff being the bruising to her left arm, he submits that an appropriate award in all the circumstances is in the range of <damage type = "other">$25,000</damage> for non-pecuniary damages. He consents to an award for past wage loss of <damage type = "other">$9,336</damage> in gross income. Otherwise, it is submitted on behalf of the defendant that no other damage awards are appropriate on the facts of this case.
Non-pecuniary loss
157  The plaintiff seeks a total award of non-pecuniary damages in the range of <damage type = "other">$153,881</damage> to <damage type = "other">$194,213</damage>, comprised of an award of non-pecuniary damages in the range of $58,881 to $81,363 related to the plaintiff's ruptured left breast implant; an award in the range of <damage type = "other">$60,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$77,850</damage> in relation to the plaintiff's soft-tissue injuries and the increased frequency and intensity of migraine headaches she claims to have suffered after the accident, and an award in the range of $35,000 for emotional distress.
158  As stated, the defendant's position is that a total award for non-pecuniary damages in this case ought to be in the range of <damage type = "other">$25,000</damage>.
The ruptured left breast implant
159  To support an award in the range sought, the plaintiff relies upon the following authorities: Hollis v. Birch,  (S.C.) [Hollis]; Rennick v. Miller,  (S.C.) [Rennick]; and Wilson.
160  I have reviewed the above cases and considered their similarities and differences to the case at bar. In Hollis, a 1990 decision, the judge awarded $50,000 in relation to non-pecuniary damages arising from the surgical replacement of negligently manufactured breast implant. In Rennick, a 1996 decision, the award was $45,000 in the case of a left breast implant that was ruptured in a motor vehicle accident. The plaintiff in that case required both implants to be surgically replaced and suffered left-arm strain and bruising that resolved shortly, as well as headaches. In Wilson, a 1993 decision, the plaintiff was awarded $40,000 for disfigurement of her right breast that required corrective surgery. She also suffered ongoing physical and psychological pain.
161  In the present case the left implant will be replaced. It is not known if the right implant will also have to be replaced to achieve breasts of a similar size. The plaintiff has endured considerable pain and suffering, the painful and difficult injections of the lump of necrotic fat by Dr. Horton. She has also had to endure the ongoing discomfort and emotional and psychological upset and distress caused by the ruptured implant remaining in her chest and the very significant disparity in the size of her breasts for a period of three years and three months. In all the circumstances I find that a fit and proper award in non-pecuniary damages for this injury is $65,000.
Soft-tissue Injuries and Migraine Headaches
162  To support an award in the range of $60,000 to $77,850, the plaintiff relies upon the following authorities: Andres v. Leslie,  [Andres]; Bancroft-Wilson v. Murphy,  [Bancroft-Wilson]; Ghataurah v. Fike,  [Ghataurah]; Heartt v. Royal,  [Heartt]; Heppner v. Zia,  [Heppner]; Klein v. Dowhy,  [Klein]; Kuskis v. Tin,  [Kuskis]; and Pratt v. Barlow,  [Pratt].
163  To support an award in the range the defendant finds to be appropriate, namely in the range of $25,000, the defendant relies upon the following authorities: Price v. Kostryb a  (S.C.) [Price]; Reyes v. Pascual,  [Reyes]; Job v. Van Blankers,  [Job]; Aulakh v. Poirier,  [Aulakh]; and Garcha v. Gill,  [Garcha].
164  Having reviewed the authorities provided in the context of the present case with regards to the plaintiff's the soft-tissue injuries to her neck, left shoulder, and left arm and wrist, and taking into account a modest increase in the frequency and severity of her chronic and pre-existing migraine headaches, from which I have found she was substantially recovered in September 2007, I find that an award of $30,000 is appropriate as non-pecuniary damages for these injuries.
Emotional Distress
165  Plaintiff's counsel seeks an award of up to $35,000 for emotional distress. He submits that the plaintiff has suffered significant mental distress and psychological problems as a result of the injuries she sustained in the accident, most specifically in relation to the rupture of her left breast implant and the complications arising from it. He submits that the testimony of Mr. Chaloner and the plaintiff's daughter, Chandra Mayoh, supports the testimony of the plaintiff in this regard.
166  In her testimony, the plaintiff said that she has suffered periods of depression, sadness, distress, and lower-self esteem from the injuries she sustained in the accident, her ongoing pain in her left shoulder and reduced mobility in her left wrist, and increased problems with migraines, in addition to the stress, worry, and discomfort arising from her collapsed left breast implant. Her evidence is that feeling depressed, sad, and in pain has caused her to withdraw socially, impacted negatively on her relationships with her children, and prevented her from dating and exercising as she has in the past.
167  Her claim under this head of damages is not supported by any medical, psychiatric or psychological evidence. I note that Dr. Ticea referred the plaintiff to a psychologist but the plaintiff said that she could not afford to go, and did not attend counselling. Although the plaintiff was referred to a psychiatrist, Dr. Rana, there is no evidence from this person.
168  Damages for psychological injuries were recently discussed by the Supreme Court of Canada in Mustapha v. Culligan of Canada Ltd.,  [Mustapha] at para. 9:
[P]sychological disturbance that rises to the level of personal injury must be distinguished from psychological upset. Personal injury at law connotes serious trauma or illness: see Hinz v. Berry, [1970] 2 Q.B. 40 (C.A.), at p. 42; Page v. Smith, [1996] 1 A.C. 155, at p. 189; Linden and Feldthusen, at pp. 425-27. The law does not recognize upset, disgust, anxiety, agitation or other mental states that fall short of injury. I would not purport to define compensable injury exhaustively, except to say that it must be serious and prolonged and rise above the ordinary annoyances, anxieties and fears that people living in society routinely, if sometimes reluctantly, accept. The need to accept such upsets rather than seek redress in tort is what I take the Court of Appeal to be expressing in its quote from Vanek v. Great Atlantic & Pacific Co. of Canada  (C.A.): "Life goes on" (para. 60). Quite simply, minor and transient upsets do not constitute personal injury, and hence do not amount to damage.
169  That case dealt with a tort where there was no physical injury at all, but the discussion of compensable injury is relevant nonetheless. In a very recent case, Kotai v. Queen of the North (The), , Joyce J. conducted a very thorough review of the case law around emotional distress, including Mustapha, when determining whether damages for emotional distress would result from the sinking of a ferry that the plaintiffs were aboard and concluded, at para. 69:
Accordingly, I conclude that there remains a requirement that the claimants prove not just psychological disturbance or upset as a result of the defendant's negligence but also that their psychological disturbance rises to the level of a recognizable psychiatric illness.
170  Based on these cases, I decline to make a separate award of damages for the plaintiff's emotional distress. The plaintiff simply did not provide any evidence which suggests that her emotional distress came to the level of a recognizable psychiatric illness. Nor do I attribute her emotional distress entirely to the accident and her collapsed breast implant, but also to other life stressors including her separation, being a single parent, financial worries, problems with her son, and her lack of success in the welding trade, all of which I find to be unrelated to the accident. In addition, to my mind, the specific claims above for non-pecuniary damages by definition include a measure of pain and suffering related to the injuries sustained in the accident and their aftermath, including in relation to the ruptured breast implant.
Loss of Future Income and Future Earning Capacity
171  The plaintiff seeks an award in the range of $300,000 to $400,000 for loss of future income and future earning capacity as a result of injuries she sustained in the accident. She relies on the approach taken by Finch J.A., as he then was, in Pallos v. Insurance Corporation of British Columbia  at paras. 24-27. In addition, the plaintiff relies upon Earnshaw v. Despins  (C.A.) at 399; Palmer v. Goodall  (C.A.) at 59; Rosvold v. Dunlop,  at para. 9; and Kuskis at paras. 151-154.
172  The defendant's position is that there is no evidence upon which to make an award for loss of future earning capacity. The defendant refers to the following authorities in relation to future income loss: Job at para. 47; Steward, , at para. 14; Bedwell v. McGill,  [Bedwell]; and Chang v. Feng,  at paras. 73-79 [Chang].
173  The law in British Columbia around the awarding of damages for loss of future earning capacity has been interpreted differently over the last fifteen years, with differences between a "capital asset" approach and a "future possibility" approach. However, two recent Court of Appeal decisions have given strong direction to trial judges in the way in which these damages should be determined.
174  In Rosvold, Huddart J.A. reviewed the principles relating to these awards and stated, at para. 8, that an "award for loss of earning capacity is based on the recognition that a plaintiff's capacity to earn income is an asset which has been taken away ... What is being compensated is not lost projected future earnings but the loss or impairment of earning capacity as a capital asset". This has been referred to as the capital asset approach. Huddart J.A. continued, at para. 10, to canvas several other cases to come up with a list of four factors the trial judge should consider in this regard:
whether the plaintiff has been rendered less capable overall from earning income from all types of employment;
whether the plaintiff is less marketable or attractive as an employee to potential employers;
whether the plaintiff has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities which might otherwise have been open to him, had he not been injured; and
whether the plaintiff is less valuable to himself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market.
175  However, the capital asset approach appears to have been overtaken in two more recent Court of Appeal decisions. In Steward, a 2007 decision, the trial judge, , found that the plaintiff may have earned as much in the future as he would have if not injured in his current profession, but awarded $50,000 for "compensation for the impairment of his earning capacity in other occupations that may now be closed to him." The Court of Appeal rejected this analysis, and held, at para. 17, that "the claimant bears the onus to prove at trial a substantial possibility of a future event leading to an income loss, and the court must then award compensation on an estimation of the chance that the event will occur" [emphasis added]. Donald J.A. went on to hold that because there was no other realistic alternative occupation that would be impaired by the plaintiff's injuries, the claim for future loss must fail, and reduced the award to zero.
176  Then, in Bedwell, a 2008 decision, the trial judge, , found that the plaintiff's injuries did not make her less marketable, less valuable, or less capable overall of earning income from all types of employment. The Court of Appeal upheld the trial judge and stated, at para. 53, that "it was necessary for the appellant to have proven a substantial possibility of a future event leading to an income loss" [emphasis added], and that based on the findings of the trial judge and "lack of evidence that such injuries could lead to a future income loss, it follows that she did not prove such a substantial possibility".
177  The confusion between the two approaches was discussed by Bauman J., as he then was, in Chang. After reviewing Steward, Bauman J. held, at para. 76, that Donald J.A.'s reasons "appears to be an express direction to first enquire into whether there is a substantial possibility of future income loss before one is to embark on assessing the loss under either approach to this head of loss, in particular, under the capital asset approach as well".
178  Another recent decision discussed the factors identified in Rosvold, and their relevance to the analysis. In Job, Ker J. did not decide whether to use the capital asset approach or the future possibility approach, but found, at para. 134, that to be able to claim any damages under either approach:
[T]he plaintiff must put forward cogent evidence that she has been rendered less capable overall of earning income from all types of employment, that she is less marketable, that she cannot take advantage of job opportunities she otherwise might have, or is less valuable as a person capable of earning income.
179  Given this case law, I find that in order to succeed in her claim for loss of future income, the plaintiff must first prove a substantial possibility of a future event leading to an income loss. This possibility can be proven with reference to the four factors identified by Huddart J.A. in Rosvold. If the plaintiff proves that possibility, it is then open to the Court to value that loss based on either the capital asset approach or based on what the plaintiff would have earned but for her injuries.
180  I find that the evidence placed before the court falls significantly short of establishing that her injuries from the accident have resulted in a substantial possibility of a future event leading to an income loss. I have come to this finding with reference to the four factors referred to in Rosvold. Firstly and as indicated previously, I am not satisfied that the residual weaknesses identified by Mr. Banks in the plaintiff's left wrist and hand were caused or contributed to by the accident. On the evidence those would be the injuries that would render the plaintiff less capable overall of earning income in the future. Second, given that I have found that she was substantially recovered from the soft-tissue injuries by September 2007, with the exception of the replacement of the left breast implant yet to be repaired, there is no evidence that she is less marketable as a result of injuries sustained in the accident, as there is no suggestion that the implant surgery will leave her with a lasting injury or deficit that will impact future employment. Third, in terms of job opportunities that she otherwise would have taken advantage of absent injuries from the accident, there is very little evidence of the plaintiff's work history prior to the accident before the court with the exception of her year of employment as a meat packer at Hill's immediately preceding the accident. Her income in recent past years does not lend support to an inference that the plaintiff has job opportunities available that are likely to be adversely impacted by injuries sustained in the accident. She reported to Mr. Banks that she had worked previously for an unspecified time as a bartender but no details were provided. Her plan to become a welder did not materialize beyond her struggling with the training and less than a month of welding employment. I find that it is too big a leap to assume that the plaintiff would have worked for many future years as a welder, or indeed regularly in any job or occupation, and then to assess loss of future capacity based on the projections by Mr. Benning.
181  For these reasons I decline to award any amount for loss of future income and future earning capacity.
Past Wage Loss and Past Loss of Opportunities
182  The plaintiff and the defendant have agreed that the plaintiff lost <damage type = "other">$9,336</damage> in gross income due to being unable to work after the accident, resulting in a net figure of approximately $8,400. Accordingly, I award <damage type = "past wage loss">$8,400</damage> in past wage loss.
Loss of Housekeeping Capacity
183  The plaintiff claims damages for loss of housekeeping capacity in the range of <damage type = "other">$17,235</damage> to <damage type = "other">$40,392</damage>. This is based on the claim that she is less able at present and in the future to clean her house and perform the household duties as she did prior to the accident. The proposed range is based on a cost of $15 per hour with five hours a week being required and then projections of the future costs over the next five, ten, and 15 years, discounted for present value.
184  The defendant submits that the evidence of the plaintiff was that she was able to do her own housekeeping, just with some additional difficulty.
185  The law recognizes that a plaintiff whose ability to perform housekeeping services is diminished in part or in whole ought to be compensated for that loss; that the loss of housekeeping ability is that of the plaintiff and not her family; and that when family members have gratuitously done the work that the plaintiff can no longer do and the tasks they perform have a market value, that value provides a tangible indication of the loss the plaintiff has suffered which enables the court to assign a monetary value: Kroeker v. Jansen  (B.C.C.A.) leave to appeal to S.C.C. refused, ; McTavish v. MacGillivray,  [McTavish].
186  However, in the present case, given that I have found that the plaintiff was substantially recovered from the accident by September 2007, I must dismiss her claim for loss of future housekeeping capacity.
187  In terms of replacement housekeeping services performed for the plaintiff by her daughter from the date of the accident to September 2007, a period of 12 months, the evidence before the court is not specific as to the number of hours spent. Nor does it provide a clear list of the kinds of tasks the plaintiff's daughter assumed in her stead beyond shopping for groceries, driving her younger brother to school and, as her mother recovered, moving heavy items for cleaning. There is no indication of the frequency with which she performed these tasks or the time she spent. Without this type of evidence I find that I am unable to quantify and value the replacement services provided by the plaintiff's daughter to assist the plaintiff during this 12 month period. Therefore, I am unable to make a specific award to compensate the plaintiff for these housekeeping tasks, as is contemplated in McTavish at para. 68.
Cost of Future Care
188  The plaintiff claims future care costs related to the replacement of the ruptured left breast implant ($5,883), and double that amount if both breasts require replacement implants to achieve symmetry.
189  She also seeks an award for future care costs for her on-going injuries to cover medications (Advil, Topimax, Imitrex, and a nasal spray) and water therapy, physiotherapy and a gym membership, calculated over the next five, ten, or 15 years, resulting in a present value range of $28,776 to $59,316.
190  The defendant submits that there is no evidence upon which to base an award for future care costs.
191  The test to be applied when the court considers awarding the cost of future care is set out by McLachlin J., as she then was, in Milina v. Bartsch  at 84 [Milina] as follows:
The test for determining the appropriate award under the heading of cost of future care, it may be inferred, is an objective one based on medical evidence.
These authorities establish:
that there must be a medical justification for claims for cost of future care; and
that the claims must be reasonable.
[...]
The award for cost of care should reflect what the evidence establishes is reasonably necessary to preserve the plaintiff's health.
192  Given that I have found that the plaintiff has not proven on-going injury related to the accident after September 2007, I find that there is no legal basis for an award in relation to the future care costs as sought by the plaintiff, with the exception of the cost to replace the ruptured left breast implant.
193  In relation to the surgery required to replace the left breast implant, I award <damage type = "sub-future care">$5,883</damage> as a onetime cost for that purpose. Based on the evidence it is likely that the plaintiff will require medication related to that surgery for pain management and to reduce the risk of infection. As no amount is specifically allocated to this purpose but rather there are much larger amounts claimed as part of the plaintiff's claim for future care, somewhat arbitrarily I award the plaintiff an additional <damage type = "sub-future care">$500</damage> for medications related to the breast implant replacement surgery, for a total amount of <damage type = "future care">$6,383</damage>. However, I decline to order double that amount for future breast implant replacement surgery to cover the possibility that the plaintiff's right breast implant may also have to be exchanged to achieve breasts of more or less equal size. The evidence of Dr. Horton acknowledges that as a possibility only.
Special Damages
194  The plaintiff claims <damage type = "other">$4,038.71</damage> for special damages for physiotherapy sessions, various prescribed medications, a doctor's note, and a visit to an occupational therapist.
195  It is well established that the plaintiff is entitled to recover as special damages all the pre-trial expenses she incurred as a result of her injuries, so long as they were caused by the tort and the decision to incur them was reasonable: see Jamie Cassels, Remedies: The Law of Damages (Toronto: Irwin Law Inc., 2000) at p. 116. When assessing the quantum of damages under any recognized head, the court is concerned, ultimately, with making the party whole. McLachlin J., as she then was, described this animating principle in Milina at 78:
The fundamental governing precept is restitutio in integrum. The injured person is to be restored to the position he would have been in had the accident not occurred, insofar as this can be done with money. This is the philosophical justification for damages for loss of earning capacity, cost of future care and special damages.
196  I have reviewed the schedule of special expenses claimed and find the amount claimed to be in order. Therefore, I award <damage type = "special">$4,038.71</damage>.
Mitigation
197  The issue arises as to what extent, if any, the plaintiff failed to mitigate the injuries and symptoms caused by the accident by not following the prescribed treatment plan or engaging in activities not conducive to full recovery.
198  In particular, counsel for the defendant submits that the plaintiff has failed to mitigate her losses by failing to return to Florida to have the ruptured breast implant replaced by the plastic surgeon who implanted it, given that Dr. Horton testified that is it common for there to be warranties on breast implants and for the original surgeons to perform follow-up operations without additional charge when an implant ruptures. He submits that the plaintiff indicated that she was aware that there was a five year warranty on her implants, and that she had failed to make any inquiries as to the cost of travelling to Florida to have the ruptured implant replaced, as opposed to continuing to seek coverage for the replacement through her insurer.
199  He also submits that although the plaintiff testified that she had sought loans from a number of people to assist her with this procedure she failed to call evidence to that effect, and her mother, Ms. Mayoh, denied being asked by her daughter for a loan to contribute to the payment for the procedure. The position taken on behalf of the defendant is ultimately not that she ought to have found and paid the estimated cost of $6,000 to replace the ruptured implant, but that her efforts to investigate alternatives were not adequate.
200  In reference to his submission that the plaintiff has failed to take reasonable steps to mitigate her damages, particularly in relation to the collapsed implant, counsel for the defendant refers to Antoniali v. Massey, , in which Preston J. considered whether the plaintiff had unreasonably failed to mitigate by failing to embark on an exercise program under the supervision of a personal trainer to rehabilitate herself or alleviate the continuing effect of her injuries. He also referred to Job, where Ker J. reduced an award of non-pecuniary damages by 10% due to the plaintiff's failure to mitigate by following the treatment regime recommended by her physician at the time the recommendation was made, even though she found, at para. 114, "it meant some initial financial hardship in terms of ability to pay for the treatments".
201  In response, counsel for the plaintiff submits that the plaintiff has mitigated honourably by attending physiotherapy, then fully participating in the active rehabilitation program recommended by her physician and available to her through ICBC, followed by doing the recommended exercises and stretching thereafter. He submits that it is simply too much to expect a plaintiff, particularly someone in his client's position to come up with $6,000 for this kind of surgery, particularly when she is dealing with other injuries arising from the accident, and no longer lives in Florida.
202  The law imposes upon plaintiffs the duty to mitigate their losses. This includes taking reasonable steps to minimize any loss relating to their injuries. Its purpose is to prevent plaintiffs from seeking recovery from defendants for harm and loss caused or contributed to by their own neglect. The onus of proof rests upon the defendant to establish a failure on the part of the plaintiff to mitigate, and whether a plaintiff has been reasonable in refusing to accept the recommended medical treatment is a decision for the trier of fact:  Janiak v. Ippolito, .
203  I find, considering the plaintiff's overall circumstances, including the other injuries she sustained in the accident and her conduct in terms of regular attendances to her doctor, and fully participating in the physiotherapy and the rehabilitation program that were recommended to her, that it cannot be said that she unreasonably failed to mitigate. I have taken into account her failure to take psychological and psychiatric counselling in terms of making no award for emotional distress, but I am firmly of the view that it is unreasonable for counsel for the defendant to assert that she ought to have flown to Florida and incurred whatever costs were associated with having the ruptured implant replaced there. As her counsel pointed out, there is a significant difference between a $15 user fee and personally incurring significant costs associated with such a surgery, which is estimated to cost approximately $6,000 if performed in British Columbia by Dr. Horton.
Conclusion
204  For these reasons I find that the plaintiff has established the following claims in damages in the following amounts arising from the accident, for a total of <damage type = "total">$113,821.71</damage>:
Non-pecuniary damages -- <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$95,000</damage>;
Loss of future income and future earning capacity -- nil;
Past wage loss -- <damage type = "past wage loss">$8,400</damage>;
Loss of housekeeping ability -- nil;
Cost of future care -- <damage type = "future care">$6,383</damage>; and
Special damages -- <damage type = "special">$4,038.71</damage>.
205  The plaintiff is also entitled to interest pursuant to the Court Order Interest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 79.
206  I find that the plaintiff is entitled to costs at Scale B payable forthwith, unless the parties provide notification to the Registry and Trial Scheduling within 21 days of the date of filing of this judgment. In the event further submission are to be made they are to be in writing and the plaintiff is to file such written submissions within 21 days of the notice referred to above, the defendant is to respond within 14 days thereafter, and the plaintiff is to file any further brief written reply within a further 7 days.
E.A. ARNOLD-BAILEY J.
End of Document
Kuras v. Repo, [2014] B.C.J. No. 2204
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
H.J. Holmes J.
Heard: April 14-17 and 22-25, June 3, 2014.
Judgment: August 26, 2014.
Docket: M120948
Registry: Vancouver
[2014] B.C.J. No. 2204   |
Between Martha Kuras, Plaintiff, and Natasha Kathleen Repo, Defendant
(92 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Body injuries — Soft tissue — Fibromyalgia or chronic pain — Considerations impacting on award — Pre-existing injury — Action by plaintiff for personal injury damages allowed — Plaintiff, age 31, was injured in 2010 minor rear-end collision — Plaintiff sustained soft tissue injuries to neck and back and experienced ongoing frequent headaches and chronic pain — Plaintiff established caused persistent symptoms — Accident aggravated previously asymptomatic condition, rendering it symptomatic — Plaintiff awarded non-pecuniary damages of $80,000, special damages of $3,677, $15,000 for past wage loss, and $107,500 for loss of future earning capacity — No damages awarded for costs of future care due to insufficient evidence.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Considerations — Duration of loss — Employment status — Extent of incapacity — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Special damages — Past loss of income — Non-pecuniary loss — Action by plaintiff for personal injury damages allowed — Plaintiff, age 31, was injured in 2010 minor rear-end collision — Plaintiff sustained soft tissue injuries to neck and back and experienced ongoing frequent headaches and chronic pain — Plaintiff established caused persistent symptoms — Accident aggravated previously asymptomatic condition, rendering it symptomatic — Plaintiff awarded non-pecuniary damages of $80,000, special damages of $3,677, $15,000 for past wage loss, and $107,500 for loss of future earning capacity — No damages awarded for costs of future care due to insufficient evidence.
Action by the plaintiff, Kuras, against the defendant, Repo, for personal injury damages. The plaintiff, age 31, was injured in a minor rear-end collision that occurred in May 2010. The defendant admitted liability for the accident. The plaintiff sustained soft tissue injuries to her neck and back. She began to experience different and more frequent headaches than the migraines she had previously experienced. The plaintiff claimed that she experienced ongoing chronic pain that was unlikely to improve. She stated that her symptoms prevented her from resuming exercise and prevented her from working to the extent anticipated in her second career as a registered nurse. The parties agreed that the plaintiff should receive $15,000 for income lost from her initial career as a software development consultant in the months after the accident. The plaintiff sought damages for non-pecuniary losses, loss of earning capacity, costs of future care, and for miscellaneous expenses. The defendant submitted that the plaintiff's injuries had substantially resolved by the end of 2010. The defendant argued that the plaintiff failed to establish that any ongoing pain was caused by the accident. The defendant contended that the pain was caused by the plaintiff's 2011 pregnancy or degenerative changes that predated the accident. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 The plaintiff established that her symptoms persisted beyond 2010, were chronic in nature, and that the accident was their cause. The medical evidence explained the mechanical cause of the plaintiff's claim and how it continued for longer than usual. Her pregnancy caused a shift in the location of the pain rather than new pain. There was no suggestion in the medical evidence that the degenerative changes experienced by the plaintiff prior to the accident had caused any symptoms, or were known to exist. Rather, the accident aggravated a previously asymptomatic condition and rendered it symptomatic. The plaintiff did not overstate the effect of the symptoms on her lifestyle. Although a degree of impairment was established, a lifetime earnings approach was inappropriate to calculate the loss of earning capacity, as the plaintiff was likely able to eventually find a full-time position suitable for her limitations. The plaintiff was awarded non-pecuniary damages of $80,000, special damages of $3,677, $15,000 for past wage loss, and $107,500 for loss of future earning capacity. No damages were awarded for costs of future care due to insufficient evidence.
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: Tanya L. Martin, Pauline V. Gardikiotis.
Counsel for the Defendant: Andrea Jones.
Reasons for Judgment
H.J. HOLMES J.
INTRODUCTION
1  Martha Kuras was injured on May 19, 2010, when the car she was driving was rear-ended on West 4th Avenue in Vancouver, B.C., after she slowed or came to a stop to allow a parked vehicle to pull out in front of her. The impact was minor in its force, the cost to repair Ms. Kuras's vehicle only about <damage type = "other">$800</damage>. The defendant admits liability for the accident.
2  The trial concerned Ms. Kuras's damages. Ms. Kuras sustained soft tissue injuries to her neck, upper back, and low back, and began to experience different and more frequent headaches than the migraine headaches she had suffered for a long time before. She claims she experiences pain which is now chronic and unlikely to improve, and which prevents her resuming some of the forms of physical exercise that support her emotional health and enrich her recreational and family life. She also claims that her injuries will prevent her working to the extent she anticipated in her new, second career as a Registered Nurse. Ms. Kuras seeks substantial damages for her non-pecuniary losses (pain, suffering, and loss of enjoyment of life) and for loss of her capacity to earn in the future, as well as more modest damages for out-of-pocket expenses and costs of future care. The parties agree that Ms. Kuras should receive damages of <damage type = "past wage loss">$15,000</damage> to compensate her for income she lost in the weeks or months after the accident in her former career as a consulting software developer.
3  The defendant acknowledges that the accident caused the soft tissue injuries and headaches Ms. Kuras experienced in the months that followed, but says that those injuries were substantially resolved by the end of 2010. The defendant says that Ms. Kuras has not established that any neck or back pain and headaches after that time resulted from the accident, and not from other causes, notably the pregnancy that led to the birth of Ms. Kuras's child in October 2011, or the early degenerative changes which, as Ms. Kuras acknowledges, pre-dated the accident. The defendant says that in any event Ms. Kuras has established no loss of earning capacity, because not all RN jobs have the types of physical demands which Ms. Kuras claims her injuries prevent her meeting, and numerous forms of assistance and accommodations are available. Since, the defendant says, the only real effect of her injuries is on some forms of her recreational exercise, Ms. Kuras's main damages are properly for non-pecuniary losses, and not loss of earning capacity. The defendant submits that Ms. Kuras's damages should in any event be assessed with caution, because her claim is based only on her subjective reports of symptoms and on the evidence of her husband, Malcolm Patterson, an interested party, and is unsupported by evidence from more objective witnesses who were or are in a position to see Ms. Kuras contending with the limitations she claims.
ISSUES
4  The parties' positions and the evidence give rise to the following issues:
whether Ms. Kuras has established that the accident was the cause of the symptoms she experienced after the end of 2010 and continuing;
taking into account how that issue is determined, the amount of non-pecuniary damages (as compensation for pain and suffering and loss of enjoyment of life) Ms. Kuras should receive;
whether Ms. Kuras has established a loss of future earning capacity, and, if she has, the amount of damages she should receive as compensation for that loss;
whether the evidence supports Ms. Kuras's claim for costs of future care; and
whether Ms. Kuras's special damages for her out-of-pocket expenses should include compensation for orthotics and an air foam mattress she purchased.
5  I will address these issues in turn.
DID THE ACCIDENT CAUSE SYMPTOMS AFTER 2010?
6  The plaintiff must establish on a balance of probabilities that the defendant's negligence caused or materially contributed to the injury in respect of which the plaintiff seeks compensation. The defendant's negligence need not have been the sole cause of the injury; a plaintiff need establish only a substantial connection between the two: Sam v. Wilson, , at paras. 108-109.
7  Causation is generally assessed according to the "but for" test: Athey v. Leonati, . Applying that test, the court asks whether, but for -- or without -- the defendant's negligence, the plaintiff would have suffered the injury.
8  As I have mentioned, the defendant acknowledges that the accident caused soft tissue injuries and headaches, but submits that those injuries were substantially resolved by the end of 2010. The defendant contends that Ms. Kuras has failed to establish that the neck or back pain and headaches she claims to have experienced since that time and on an ongoing basis are attributable to the accident. The defendant submits that, on the evidence, the more likely causes are either or both of Ms. Kuras's pregnancy and the early degenerative changes that pre-dated the accident.
9  Before addressing this submission, I will note in passing that both parties recognize or accept that the headaches Ms. Kuras attributes to the accident are different in nature from the migraine headaches she has experienced since a teenager. The migraine headaches continue, at an average of between two and three per month, and there is no suggestion that the accident caused or aggravated them. The headaches Ms. Kuras attributes to the accident are different in their quality and, Ms. Kuras claims, occur in addition. Dr. Russell O'Connor, physiatrist (physical medicine and rehabilitation), who examined Ms. Kuras in August 2012 and December 2013 and gave evidence for Ms. Kuras, described those headaches as mechanical or cervicogenic.
10  As to both those additional headaches and her neck and back pain, I am satisfied that Ms. Kuras has established that those symptoms troubled her beyond 2010 and that they continue, as she claims, and that the accident was their cause.
11  I also find that the post-2010 symptoms affected Ms. Kuras in the various ways she described in her evidence, and find no basis for the defendant's submission that Ms. Kuras overstates those effects. The defendant's surveillance video-recording of Ms. Kuras shopping with Mr. Patterson and their daughter showed no behaviour on Ms. Kuras's part that was inconsistent with her account of the pain and limitations she experiences. In making that observation, I take into account that Ms. Kuras does not claim to be completely unable to perform certain tasks, such as picking up and carrying her daughter, but rather claims that she must limit their frequency if she is to avoid increasing her pain and fatigue. And, for reasons similar to those I will give later in relation to a different aspect of Ms. Kuras's claim, I find no weakness in Ms. Kuras's case in this area as a result of the absence of evidence from witnesses not called.
12  As to the cause of the post-2010 symptoms, Dr. O'Connor's evidence amply supports the conclusion that they were caused by the accident, and I accept it. His evidence explains the mechanical cause of Ms. Kuras's pain, and how it is that her pain continues for longer than usual. I will describe the effects of Ms. Kuras's symptoms in more detail below when I discuss the assessment of damages for her pain and suffering and loss of enjoyment of life.
13  Dr. O'Connor was asked, in cross-examination, about the role of Ms. Kuras's pregnancy, and he responded that the pregnancy essentially pushed a notional pause button, placing Ms. Kuras's recovery from the accident injuries on hold while her body changed in various ways and while she likely had less time or opportunity for the strength and conditioning she had been doing before. He agreed that the pregnancy likely changed Ms. Kuras's low back pain, causing it to shift its location from right of the midline to the left side, but disagreed with the defendant's suggestion that the pregnancy caused the pain in the new location. Dr. O'Connor explained that although body changes in a pregnancy often do produce back pain, the pain Ms. Kuras experienced on the lower left side was not new with the pregnancy: it began with the injury from the accident that caused it, and it "grumbled along", albeit in a slightly different location, through her pregnancy and afterwards.
14  Dr. O'Connor also rejected the defendant's suggestion that an alternative cause or contributor was the early degenerative changes in Ms. Kuras's neck and back that came to light in an MRI conducted in December 2012. There is no suggestion in the evidence or submissions that these changes caused any symptoms -- or were even known to exist -- before the accident. Dr. Iain Dommisse, orthopedic surgeon, who gave evidence for the defendant, noted that fully 40% of the population have degenerative changes without pain.
15  Rather, it is clear that the accident aggravated the previously asymptomatic condition and rendered it symptomatic. Dr. O'Connor testified that this was so, and Dr. Dommisse gave evidence on this point which was largely consistent with Dr. O'Connor's, saying that the pre-existing degenerative changes were activated by the accident, and symptoms followed.
16  The only evidence to support the defendant's position that the injuries from the accident were largely resolved by the end of 2010 is a record, made in October 2010, of a treating physiotherapist who gave no evidence in the trial:
Currently I have returned her to almost pain-free status and she has been back to running and other laborious activity.
17  Ms. Kuras acknowledged that the course of physiotherapy helped the mobility in her neck, and later with her back, but she testified that it never returned her to "almost pain-free status", at least not if she tried to resume her normal running. She told the physiotherapist that running almost always led to considerable pain, especially the next day, but he encouraged her to continue and predicted that she "would be okay". Ms. Kuras testified that her continuing attempts were not "okay", and that is why she returned to her family physician, Dr. Paula Iriarte.
18  In my assessment, Ms. Kuras's evidence on this point is confirmed by that of Dr. Iriarte. Dr. Iriarte explained that Ms. Kuras's pain would come and go, sometimes as a result of the anti-inflammatory medication she was taking. Clinical records support this evidence: for example, in mid-December 2010, Dr. Iriarte saw Ms. Kuras and noted, "[s]lowly her back getting better" and "still not able to run aggravates her pain", and in February 2011, "hasn't run since the summer, very disappointed". Dr. Iriarte noted also that Ms. Kuras was accustomed to running significant distances before the accident, and that being able to run only 5 kilometres would not have been satisfactory to her. I note also that Dr. Iriarte saw the physiotherapist's record before she prepared her report for the trial, if not long before, but it did not affect her opinion that Ms. Kuras's pain from the accident continued after the end of 2010.
19  Neither Dr. O'Connor nor Dr. Iriarte was asked directly to comment on the proposition that the injuries from the accident were substantially resolved by the end of 2010. I find no basis on which to find that they were, and am satisfied that Ms. Kuras has established that her symptoms, as she describes them, from the injuries caused by the accident continue to this day.
(b) WHAT DAMAGES WILL COMPENSATE MS. KURAS'S NON-PECUNIARY LOSSES?
20  On that basis, I turn to assess the damages Ms. Kuras should receive to compensate her for the non-pecuniary losses resulting from these injuries.
21  Before doing so, I will briefly reject the defendant's suggestion that Ms. Kuras's pleadings do not encompass a claim in respect of the chronic pain she alleges. The pleadings clearly allege various consequences of Ms. Kuras's injuries, including neck and back pain and headaches, and, as I have discussed, the evidence establishes that they are chronic, in the sense that they have persisted for four years since the accident and are expected to continue. It was not necessary for Ms. Kuras's pleadings to specify the duration of the pain and headaches for which she was claiming, or to characterize them specifically as chronic.
22  Damages for non-pecuniary losses compensate a plaintiff for consequences such as pain, suffering, loss of enjoyment of life, and loss of amenities. Consequences, or losses, of this nature cannot be truly or directly compensated by money. As McLachlin J. (as she then was) explained in Milina v. Bartsch  (S.C.), at para. 262, these damages are awarded "for the purpose of providing substitute pleasures and amenities to make the life of the injured person more bearable".
23  The amount of compensation should be fair to all parties. Fairness is generally measured by reference to awards made in comparable cases; however, such cases, though helpful, can serve only as a rough guide because each case depends on its own unique facts: Trites v. Penner, , at paras. 188-189.
24  The factors a court will consider when assessing damages for non-pecuniary losses are helpfully set out in Stapley v. Hejslet, , at para. 46:
The inexhaustive list of common factors cited in Boyd [Boyd v. Harris, ] that influence an award of non-pecuniary damages includes:
age of the plaintiff;
nature of the injury;
severity and duration of pain;
disability;
emotional suffering; and
loss or impairment of life;
I would add the following factors, although they may arguably be subsumed in the above list:
impairment of family, marital and social relationships;
impairment of physical and mental abilities;
loss of lifestyle; and
the plaintiff's stoicism (as a factor that should not, generally speaking, penalize the plaintiff: Giang v. Clayton, ).
25  As those factors make clear, the assessment is necessarily influenced by the individual plaintiff's personal experiences in dealing with his or her injuries and their consequences. It will also be influenced by the plaintiff's ability to articulate that experience: Dilello v. Montgomery, , at para. 25.
26  Where a plaintiff's claim depends on his or her subjective reports of pain, the court should exercise great caution, especially where complaints of pain persist long after the usual recovery period. This is because complaints of pain cannot easily be disproved. The plaintiff's evidence must be convincing; it may, however, consist of the plaintiff's evidence alone, if the surrounding circumstances are consistent. McEachern C.J.S.C. gave this guidance in the following oft-quoted discussion in Price v. Kostryba  (S.C.), at para. 5:
In Butler v. Blaylock, decided 7th October 1981,  Vancouver No. B781505, I referred to counsel's argument that a defendant is often at the mercy of a plaintiff in actions for damages for personal injuries because complaints of pain cannot easily be disproved. I then said:
I am not stating any new principle when I say that the court should be exceedingly careful when there is little or no objective evidence of continuing injury and when complaints of pain persist for long periods extending beyond the normal or usual recovery.
An injured person is entitled to be fully and properly compensated for any injury or disability caused by a wrongdoer. But no one can expect his fellow citizen or citizens to compensate him in the absence of convincing evidence - which could be just his own evidence if the surrounding circumstances are consistent - that his complaints of pain are true reflections of a continuing injury.
27  Each plaintiff's claim is to be assessed according to the unique set of facts in which it is made. The accident that caused Ms. Kuras's injuries was relatively minor, and her injuries have taken longer than the norm to resolve and may never do so entirely. However, as I have explained, I am satisfied that her injuries and the symptoms she describes are real.
28  The defendant submits that Ms. Kuras overstates those symptoms, and that the Court may infer this from her failure to see a doctor until about three weeks after the accident. However, I am satisfied that Ms. Kuras believed -- rightly or wrongly -- that a walk-in clinic would not help her, in her own doctor's absence on vacation, and, more significantly, that she expected her symptoms to resolve. I note also that Ms. Kuras later undertook extensive courses of physiotherapy and massage therapy, and, more recently underwent painful trigger point injections. She would not likely have committed the time and effort she gave to these therapies, had her symptoms not had a meaningful effect on her life.
29  I do not propose to summarize the extensive evidence concerning Ms. Kuras's background before the accident, and the effects of her injuries since. Ms. Kuras and Mr. Patterson each gave credible and detailed evidence that provided a convincing picture of Ms. Kuras's personality and her life before and after the accident, with particular emphasis on her physical activities over the years. I will simply summarize my findings concerning the main effects of the injuries.
30  At the time of the accident, Ms. Kuras was 31 years of age, and had been married to Mr. Patterson for approximately eight years. The two had met two or so years earlier, when they were both close to graduating from the University of British Columbia with bachelor's degrees in computer science. Fitness was important to them both. Ms. Kuras engaged in some form of exercise almost every day, whether gym workouts, running, cycling, or some other fitness-oriented activity. Her runs were sometimes as long as 20 kilometres, but were usually between 5 and 10 kilometres. In addition to their individual exercise regimes, Ms. Kuras and Mr. Patterson often undertook outdoor activities together, as part of their recreational or social life; day-hiking and cycling are examples. For some of their holidays, they cycle-toured and camped, without van or other support, travelling substantial distances each day. Ms. Kuras had no health problems at all, apart from the migraines I mentioned earlier.
31  After the accident, Ms. Kuras began to experience increasing neck and back pain, as well as headaches, that within a few days prevented her exercising. She saw Dr. Iriarte's partner, Dr. Menzies, about three weeks after the accident, and he noted that her neck appeared to be stiff and sore, and that it and her spine were restricted in their mobility. On Dr. Menzies' recommendation, Ms. Kuras started physiotherapy and massage therapy shortly afterwards.
32  Ms. Kuras's pain continued, and she was prescribed a muscle relaxant and an anti-inflammatory medication. She had difficulty sitting for more than thirty minutes at a time, and her work as a software developer was consequently affected. It was not until the fall of 2010 that she was able to take up yoga and swimming, in an effort to maintain her fitness. As I discussed earlier, she tried to resume regular running, when her physiotherapist urged her to, but did not succeed.
33  In early 2011, Ms. Kuras's pain was worse, not better, and was waking her at night. However, in March 2011, after learning unexpectedly that Ms. Kuras was pregnant, she and Mr. Patterson decided to try another cycle tour that they had postponed from the fall of 2010 because of her injuries. However, the drive to the start of the cycle tour exacerbated Ms. Kuras's back pain, and required the couple to take unplanned respite in a hotel. Also, despite adjustments to Ms. Kuras's bicycle at the recommendation of her physiotherapist, cycling led to neck pain and headaches, and required the couple to reduce their distance on cycling days and increase the number of rest days.
34  Ms. Kuras had a healthy and normal pregnancy, during which she continued with physiotherapy.
35  The demands of new motherhood, notably breastfeeding, required Ms. Kuras to hold positions for extended periods which triggered or worsened her neck and back pain and gave rise to more frequent headaches. As the couple's daughter grew bigger, lifting and carrying her became more challenging. Even now, Ms. Kuras tries to limit the amount that she lifts her daughter, who is now two years of age and weighs about 30 lbs.
36  As I will discuss later, in relation to Ms. Kuras's claim for lost future earning capacity, she decided to start a new career as a registered nurse after about ten years as a computer software developer. She applied in January 2011 for admission to the accelerated (twenty month) nursing degree program at U.B.C., but, on learning of her pregnancy, deferred her entrance for a year, until the fall of 2012. At the time of the trial, Ms. Kuras was completing her final shifts during the preceptorship that concludes the program, and expected to write her licensing examination in June 2014.
37  During the program, Ms. Kuras tried to stay active by commuting to nursing school by bicycle. However, she found that her symptoms did not allow her to cycle both ways, and she therefore cycled only one way each day and took the bus the other way. She found that cycling inevitably produced neck pain, which, in turn, led to a headache, which she usually treated with Tylenol or ibuprofen. During this period, Ms. Kuras also did yoga, worked out at a gym, and periodically tried to resume running; however, increases in her activity level always led to flare-ups of her symptoms.
38  In her nursing program, it was in the clinical portions that Ms. Kuras's symptoms troubled her the most. Her clinical rotations began in late 2012 or early 2013, continued through to and included her preceptorship, which concluded at the time of the trial.
39  In her preceptorship, Ms. Kuras shadowed a qualified RN, working with her on a schedule, typical for RN work, of four 12-hour shifts, followed by four days off. The four work shifts consist of two day shifts followed by two night shifts. As I will discuss later in relation to her claim for lost future earning capacity, Ms. Kuras finds her symptoms progressively more difficult to manage during the course of this four-day course of work. In short, Ms. Kuras struggles to get through the four shifts, and has little energy left for positive family time or other activities except in the short period of a day or, at most, two, after she has recovered from the four working shifts and before she prepares herself to start the next. In noting these effects for Ms. Kuras, I take into account that a course of 12-hour work shifts, which includes both day and night shifts, is a demanding regimen even for the uninjured.
40  Unsurprisingly, Ms. Kuras's mood is affected by her symptoms and the limitations they place on her family life.
41  The limitations also affect Ms. Kuras's emotional health in a less direct way by reducing the extent to which she can rely on exercise to cope with stress and other challenges, as she did before. Ms. Kuras struggled with an eating disorder in her teens and later, and exercise was one of the tools she used to keep it in check. She testified that although the eating disorder has not resurfaced since the accident, she recognizes in herself the beginnings of some unhealthy thought patterns she associates with the previous problems. Although in cross-examination Ms. Kuras resiled somewhat from the evidence she had given to this effect in her examination-in-chief, I find that her eating disorder has the potential to re-emerge, with the loss of frequent and strenuous exercise as her main coping mechanism.
42  At this point in her recovery, Ms. Kuras continues with yoga and swimming and some workouts at the gym, but is unable to resume her preferred forms of exercise at her pre-accident level. She does cycle, but no longer for significant distances, and usually with neck pain and headaches as consequences, and cycle-touring seems to be out of the question. She walks with Mr. Patterson and their daughter, sometimes for considerable distances, but rigorous hikes are no longer enjoyable for her because of the pain they produce. Her efforts to resume running produce flare-ups that she cannot tolerate.
43  Ms. Kuras seeks an award of between <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$125,000</damage> for her non-pecuniary losses, and relies on the following cases in support: Gosselin v. Neal, ; Foran v. Nguyen, ; and Fox v. Danis, .
44  However, in my view the plaintiffs in those cases generally experienced injuries with consequences more severe than in the present case. For example, the plaintiff in Foran had lasting pain in her neck that radiated to her head and trapezius and was "always" present, though it ranged in severity (paras. 13-14). She was unable to sleep through the night and was also left with a significantly higher risk for re-injury to her neck. In Fox, the plaintiff experienced permanent nerve damage in addition to the soft tissue injury to her lower back.
45  The defendant suggests an award of between <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage>, and relies on these cases in support: Rozendaal v. Landingin, ; Sharpe v. Tidey, ; Lees v. Compton, ; Hatch v. Kumar, ; Skusek v. Horning, ; DeGuzman v. Ge, ; and Singh v. Borejszo, .
46  Some of the cases on which the defendant relies involved consequences less severe than those experienced by Ms. Kuras. For example, the plaintiff in Sharpe, who, like Ms. Kuras, was an athletic person, did not experience significant changes in his lifestyle and, in fact, found that sports activity helped him to manage his pain; also, his symptoms were expected to abate over the longer term, though not to fully resolve. In both Lees and Skusek, documentary evidence indicated that the impact of the injuries had not been so severe as to prevent strenuous recreational activity. In Singh, the plaintiff's symptoms, which included headaches and pain in her neck, back, and shoulders, were "80% recovered" by approximately two years after the accident (para. 30).
47  Ms. Kuras's symptoms are not dissimilar to those of the plaintiff in Rozendaal, where the award was <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage>. However, the consequences of those symptoms on Ms. Kuras's enjoyment of life supports a higher award. Like Ms. Rozendaal, Ms. Kuras is now restricted in her enjoyment of many aspects of her daily life, and will likely continue to be constrained by her symptoms, which intrude with varying frequency and intensity. But in addition, Ms. Kuras can no longer engage in activities (running, long-distance cycling, and serious hiking) which she not only enjoyed but also relied on for her emotional well-being. Moreover, some of those activities were key elements of her family life with Mr. Patterson, including vacations.
48  I conclude that the appropriate award for Ms. Kuras's non-pecuniary losses is <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$80,000</damage>.
(c) IS LOSS OF FUTURE EARNING CAPACITY PROVEN? WHAT DAMAGES WILL COMPENSATE?
49  A claim for loss of future earning capacity raises two key questions: first, has the plaintiff's earning capacity been impaired by his or her injuries; and second, if it has, what compensation should be awarded for the financial harm that will accrue over time as a result? To the extent that this is possible, the plaintiff should be put in the position he or she would have been in but for the injuries caused by the defendant's negligence: Lines v. W & D Logging Co. Ltd., , at para. 185. The Court thus compares the plaintiff's working life as it is likely now to be, with the working life the plaintiff would likely have had without the accident: Gregory v. Insurance Corporation of British Columbia, , at para. 32.
50  The assessment of loss must be based on the evidence, and is not reached by the application of a purely mathematical calculation. The appropriate means of assessment will vary from case to case. There are two main approaches to the assessment of loss of future earning capacity: the "earnings approach", outlined in Pallos v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia  (C.A.), at para. 43, which is based mainly on projected income loss; and the "capital asset approach", outlined in Brown v. Golaiy  (S.C.), which examines the effects on the plaintiff's overall capacity to earn, her value to herself and to others in the applicable employment market, and the range of job opportunities she is able to take up. Both approaches are correct approaches, the choice between them turning largely on whether the loss in question can be quantified in a measureable way: Perren v. Lalari, . The overall fairness and reasonableness of the award must also be considered, because the assessment of damages is a matter of judgment, not calculation: Rosvold v. Dunlop, , at para. 18.
51  The standard of proof in relation to future events is simple probability, not the balance of probabilities. A plaintiff is entitled to compensation for real and substantial possibilities of loss, which are to be quantified by estimating the chance of the loss occurring. Thus, hypothetical events are to be given weight according to their relative likelihood: Athey, at para. 27. Similarly, since future events are inherently unknown, the assessment must allow for the contingency that the assumptions upon which the award is based may prove to be wrong: Milina, at para. 175.
52  Ms. Kuras submits that her earning capacity is significantly reduced by her inability to take up a full-time nursing position or to work overtime when that work is available. She testified that her experience in the preceptorship, with the shift structure typical for RN work in direct patient care, led her to conclude that she can manage two consecutive shifts, but not four. Ms. Kuras testified that after her first shift, she usually needed to take a Tylenol in the evening after she returned home. After the second shift, she had similar symptoms but they were still "tolerable". However, because she knew that her pain would not likely abate during the day between her second shift, a day shift, and her third shift, a night shift, she usually took Tylenol 3 during that time, in order to be able to take up the night shift on the third day. She also tried to rest as much as possible during that third day, and limited her activities with her daughter. When she worked the two night shifts, she found herself unable, because of pain, to sleep in the two-hour rest period available to RNs for that purpose. By her fourth and last shift, her pain was distracting and prevented her from concentrating properly on her work.
53  Ms. Kuras testified that she tried to time her medications during the course of the four working shifts in her preceptorship so that they interfered as little as possible with her cognitive function while working, and she relied also, for safety, on the constant supervision of her work by her preceptor.
54  She testified that as a result of her experience during her preceptorship, and contrary to her and Mr. Patterson's original plan to recoup the costs of her change of career, she intends not to seek a full-time nursing position but rather to seek a part-time position allowing her to work for two days at a time. She hopes to gain as much experience as she can on that basis until she is able to work at full capacity.
55  Ms. Kuras submits also that over the longer term, her injuries will restrict the range of positions she can manage, limiting her to positions with lighter duties or without shift work. Furthermore, she submits that her injuries will place her at increased risk of re-injury in a profession which, as I find the evidence established, itself involves a high risk of injury. These effects all place Ms. Kuras at increased risk of unemployment, she submits.
56  The evidence made clear that new graduates are expected to work in direct patient care until, usually after one or two years (occasionally as little as six months), they secure a permanent full-time position. Direct patient care is recognized as physically demanding for nurses, who are required to shift and manoeuvre equipment and to move patients and to help them move themselves. It is this type of care which, as I discussed above, Ms. Kuras found too difficult to sustain over the course of four consecutive shifts without pain that interfered with her family and personal life and caused her concern about safe practice as a nurse.
57  The defendant submits first that Ms. Kuras has not established that her injuries make her unable to meet the physical demands of a full-time nursing position, because her own evidence on that point is not credible or reliable, and it lacks any support from objective sources, such as co-workers, who could be expected to confirm Ms. Kuras's limitations if they were real.
58  This submission cannot succeed, because I find Ms. Kuras's evidence convincing about her experience in her preceptorship. It is also confirmed by the evidence given by Mr. Patterson and, to an extent, Ms. Kuras's mother, and is largely consistent with the result of functional capacity testing by Russell McNeil, occupational therapist, as well as with Dr. O'Connor's observations and opinion, all of which I accept.
59  That Ms. Kuras has chosen not to advise any of her supervisors or co-workers about her symptoms or limitations says more, on my view of the evidence as a whole, about her determination to succeed in her chosen field (therefore not wanting to reveal her limitations) than it does about the nature and effects of her symptoms and limitations. Also, although I find Ms. Kuras entirely credible on the subjects of her symptoms and their effects, I conclude that she has been strategic in what she chooses to say about those or other subjects to people in or associated with her workplace or nursing program. For example, in an email to an administrator of the nursing program, Ms. Kuras gave false information about her travel plans in an effort to gain advance information about her preceptorship placement.
60  The defendant submits also that it is not enough for Ms. Kuras to surmise that she will have difficulty meeting the physical demands of a full-time job as an RN; she must prove that this will be so. As the Court of Appeal noted in Kim v. Morier, , at para. 8, a plaintiff must show a realistic possibility that she will be less able to compete in the marketplace in a manner that has economic consequences, and not merely psychological ones, such as anxiety or fear about her future.
61  However, Ms. Kuras's claim in this area does not rely on her perception alone. It has the support of her experience to date, as she described it in her evidence, and of the evidence of Dr. O'Connor and Mr. McNeil about her physical limitations and how they are likely to affect her ability to perform as the job of an RN requires. Cynthia Startup testified about vocational opportunities for RNs, and her report describes those requirements in detail.
62  Robert Carson, economist, calculates lifetime earnings for a newly-qualified RN from the time of the trial with a present value of between approximately <damage type = "other">$1 million</damage> (to Ms. Kuras's age 59) and approximately <damage type = "other">$1.5 million</damage> (to her age 63). Ms. Kuras submits that the assessment of her loss of future earning capacity should be based on a conclusion that she will experience a 25% reduction in her capacity to work over the course of her working career. She suggests an award of <damage type = "other">$371,885</damage>, plus additional compensation in respect of lost overtime shifts, an aspect of her claim I will address later.
63  However, in my view, a lifetime earnings-based approach is not the most suitable approach to the assessment of Ms. Kuras's loss, because I am unable to accept her position that she may be limited to part-time work for most, and possibly all, of her career as an RN.
64  In my view, once Ms. Kuras has completed the necessary amount of direct patient care to qualify her for an entry-level permanent position, she will find such a position, suited to her physical capabilities and interests, that she will be able to maintain on a full-time basis. The evidence made clear that within the wide range of job opportunities for RNs are many for which the physical requirements are far less onerous than the direct patient care Ms. Kuras performed during her preceptorship. Although the work for RNs varies greatly, the rate of pay does not, subject to lock-step increments reflecting experience.
65  Ms. Kuras submits that her career choice is to work on an acute care or medical ward, such as a cardiac ward, where the physical demands are high, and that she will likely never be able to manage full-time work in such a position. However, in my view, Ms. Kuras's interests within the nursing field are less fixed than this submission implies. On the evidence, her interest in, specifically, cardiac care did not emerge until December 2013 or January 2014, only months before the trial. In emails relating to actual or contemplated job applications, Ms. Kuras indicated interest in entirely different nursing fields: for example, in January 2014, she said she felt a pull toward eventually completing the Nurse Practitioner program. Qualification as a Nurse Practitioner would require further education, but would lead to higher earnings than an RN's, with significantly lower physical demands than for RN direct patient care.
66  On all the evidence, the career of Nurse Practitioner seems well-suited to Ms. Kuras's interests and to her evident strengths, and is a career option that I consider her very likely to have pursued at some point, even without the accident. I therefore cannot conclude that, over the long term, Ms. Kuras's earnings will be seriously diminished by the accident's effects.
67  Nonetheless, Ms. Kuras has established a loss of future earning capacity that has two main aspects.
68  First, I accept that in order to gain the experience equivalent to between one and two years in direct patient care, she will not be able to work more than two shifts on consecutive days before taking days off. This will likely mean that she is confined to part-time work, with correspondingly reduced earnings. I see a possibility that Ms. Kuras will find a position which allows her to adjust the shift schedule and to work, for example, two days on and then two days off. However, I consider that possibility quite small: while employers of RNs generally try to accommodate disabilities and physical limitations where it is reasonable and practicable to do so, the evidence in the trial referred to no specifics of how this might be done for Ms. Kuras in a direct patient care position.
69  The award will therefore include compensation for a loss of approximately 50% of the full-time RN earnings over Ms. Kuras's first and second years. Using Mr. Carson's and economist Mark Szekely's calculations as a general guide -- although they did not address this outcome specifically -- I conclude that this aspect of the award should be in the amount of <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$40,000</damage>.
70  With Ms. Kuras confined to part-time work while she completes the necessary period of work in direct patient care, that period will be longer than if she were working full-time, delaying the start of her employment in a higher-paying permanent full-time position suited to her interests and abilities. The award will therefore also include compensation to reflect the "lag" effect on her earnings in her second, third, and fourth working years. Since the annual increase in full-time RN earnings in those early years appears to be approximately <damage type = "other">$2,500</damage> per year, the award will include approximately <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$7,500</damage> to reflect the lag effect.
71  The award will not include compensation for an ongoing or indefinite "lag" in earnings (beyond four years), resulting from the delayed start to Ms. Kuras's first full-time position, because, as discussed above, I conclude that without the accident she would likely at that stage have taken up additional education to gain qualification as a Nurse Practitioner, with, then, higher earnings than as an RN.
72  Second, Ms. Kuras has established a loss of future earning capacity that has a lifetime aspect. Although, as I have indicated, I conclude that, after the period of part-time or shift-modified work in direct patient care, Ms. Kuras will secure a full-time position suited to her interests and physical abilities, the range of options open to her, and consequently her marketability, are nonetheless restricted by her limitations.
73  This aspect of the award will be <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$60,000</damage>. I see no basis in the evidence for reducing that amount because of possibilities that other factors would have limited Ms. Kuras in this way even without the accident.
74  As I mentioned above, Ms. Kuras asks that the award for lost earning capacity take account also of lost opportunity to work overtime shifts at substantial increases in the hourly rate of pay. Based on Mr. Carson's calculations, she asks that her award include an additional <damage type = "other">$170,000</damage> to reflect this loss.
75  I do not doubt that Ms. Kuras has a strong work ethic, or that she and Mr. Patterson made financial and other sacrifices to allow her to take up her new career. However, they also lead and value full and rich personal lives, which include substantial amounts of time devoted to exercise and outdoor recreation, for personal fitness or as family activities. I do not view the evidence as establishing that but for the accident Ms. Kuras would have worked overtime when opportunity presented.
76  On the basis I have outlined, the award for Ms. Kuras's loss of earning capacity will be in the total amount of <damage type = "future wage loss">$107,500</damage>.
77  On the approach I have taken to the assessment of this loss, I doubt that the recent change to the discount rate will have any meaningful effect on the amount. However, as they suggested by letter after the Court reserved judgment, counsel will have leave to apply concerning the matter, should further direction be necessary.
WHAT ARE THE COSTS OF FUTURE CARE?
78  A plaintiff is entitled to compensation for the cost of future care based on what is reasonably necessary to restore her to her pre-accident condition insofar as that is possible. The award is to be based on what is reasonably necessary on the medical evidence to preserve and promote the plaintiff's mental and physical health: Milina, at para. 172.
79  Ms. Kuras claims a total of <damage type = "other">$15,000</damage> for the costs of future care, reflecting the costs of the following:
"trigger point injections including Botox" (plaintiff's written submissions), between three and four times per year, at a cost of between <damage type = "other">$400</damage> and <damage type = "other">$800</damage> for each set; and
various items or forms of assistance recommended by Mr. McNeil for pain management or housekeeping, having a total cost of approximately <damage type = "other">$850</damage> for initial purchases, before taxes, with many of the items requiring replacement every two to three years; for the initial and replacement costs, Mr. Carson calculates a total present value of approximately <damage type = "other">$9,000</damage>.
80  Future care costs must be justified as medically necessary, and they must be reasonable.
81  The defendant submits that the cost of trigger point injections lacks medical support, but I do not agree.
82  Dr. O'Connor testified that although trigger point injections are unlikely to give Ms. Kuras any significant benefit, they may offer a temporary pain management strategy. In light of that advice, it is reasonable for Ms. Kuras to undergo the injections in the hope of some relief. Indeed, Ms. Kuras has already begun a difficult process to this end, having had what she testified were extraordinarily painful trigger point injections on two occasions, without relief at those times but on the understanding that success often requires on average eight treatments.
83  However, it is not apparent from the evidence that the trigger point injections come at a cost to Ms. Kuras, or, if they do, what it is. In her submissions, Ms. Kuras claims a cost of between <damage type = "other">$400</damage> and <damage type = "other">$800</damage> for each set of "trigger point injections including Botox", to be administered between three and four times per year. However, this cost appears to be taken from Dr. O'Connor's December 2013 report, which, as I read it, distinguishes trigger point injections from Botox injections, and allocates the <damage type = "other">$400</damage>-<damage type = "other">800</damage> cost to the latter only:
She could trial trigger point injections into the neck and peri-facet area. She could also try a facet block ... Lastly, she could also trial Botox injections to see if this would help with her neck pain and headache frequency. The cost for this is approximately <damage type = "other">$400</damage>-<damage type = "other">$800</damage> every three months depending on whether she needs one or two vials of Botox.
84  There is no evidence of the cost to Ms. Kuras of the trigger point injections she will continue. And although Dr. O'Connor does state a cost for Botox injections, there is no evidence that Ms. Kuras wishes or plans to undergo those injections. On all the evidence, including the evidence of Ms. Kuras's attention to healthy living and her general dislike of taking medicines, I cannot infer that she will likely undergo the Botox injections as a form of treatment.
85  Nor am I persuaded that Ms. Kuras has established her claim for the costs of all the items recommended by Mr. McNeil. There is no evidence that Ms. Kuras has purchased or intends to purchase the various housekeeping items -- or, indeed, that she and Mr. Patterson did not already have housekeeping equipment with the features Mr. McNeil views as beneficial. Nor is there evidence to support a conclusion that Ms. Kuras will likely purchase and use the various pain management devices, the most costly of which is a TENS unit, together with training by a physiotherapist in how to use it.
86  In all these circumstances, the evidence does not support an award for future care costs.
(e) SHOULD SPECIAL DAMAGES INCLUDE THE COSTS OF ORTHOTICS AND AN AIR FOAM MATTRESS?
87  The defendant submits that the evidence does not support Ms. Kuras's claim for the cost of orthotics, but I do not agree. Ms. Kuras testified that Dr. Iriarte recommended orthotics when Ms. Kuras expressed concern about embarking on her preceptorship with her usual level of pain. In my view, that evidence sufficiently supports the claim for the cost of this item.
88  However, I reach the opposite conclusion about Ms. Kuras's claim for the cost of an air foam mattress. Ms. Kuras testified that she purchased the mattress because she hoped it would help her back. There is no evidence that it did, or that the purchase was recommended by a medical professional or, indeed, anyone else. Ms. Kuras's hope does not provide a sufficient foundation for requiring the defendant to compensate her.
89  The award for special damages will reflect the cost of orthotics as well the expenses the defendant agrees should be compensated, namely for physiotherapy, massage therapy, acupuncture, and medications to the time of the trial.
90  On this basis, the award will be in the amount of <damage type = "special">$3,677</damage>.
ORDER
91  Damages are awarded as follows:
(a) Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$80,000</damage> 
(b) Special damages: <damage type = "special">$3,677</damage> 
(c) Past wage loss, as agreed: <damage type = "past wage loss">$15,000</damage> 
(d) Future care: <damage type = "future care">$0</damage> 
(e) Loss of future earning capacity: <damage type = "future wage loss">$107,500</damage> 
TOTAL: <damage type = "total">$206,177</damage> 
92  If the parties are unable to agree on costs, they may, within 21 days of these reasons, and before entry of the order reflecting these reasons, arrange to speak to the issue at their and the Court's earliest convenience. Otherwise, the order will provide for Ms. Kuras to have her costs at Scale B.
H.J. HOLMES J.
End of Document
Okanagan-Similkameen (Regional District) v. Associated Engineering (B.C.) Ltd., [2015] B.C.J. No. 1105
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Penticton and Vancouver, British Columbia
J.S. Sigurdson J.
Heard: May 7-11, 23, 2012; February 2, 2015.
Judgment: June 1, 2015.
Docket: 34457
Registry: Penticton
[2015] B.C.J. No. 1105   |   2015 BCSC 909   |   254 A.C.W.S. (3d) 464   |   48 C.L.R. (4th) 298   |   2015 CarswellBC 1467
Between The Regional District of Okanagan-Similkameen, Plaintiff, and Associated Engineering (B.C.) Ltd., Defendant
(139 paras.)
Case Summary
Construction law — Liability — Of contractors and subcontractors — Duties — Duty to owner — Grounds — Breach of contract — Negligence — Damages — Action for damages for breach of contract and negligence allowed in part — Plaintiff entered into consulting services contract with defendant on water main project — Ministry of Transportation agreed to contribute <damage type = "other">$200,000</damage> to paving cost — Based on defendant's estimate of paving costs, plaintiff entered into cost sharing contract with Ministry — Plaintiff alleged defendant's estimate was too low resulting in additional costs for plaintiff — Defendant was negligent and breached contract in not including items of cost it knew or ought to have known were attributable to Ministry in preparing its estimate.
Damages — In contract — Breach of contract — Type of contract — Construction and building — Action for damages for breach of contract and negligence allowed in part — Defendant breached consulting services contract with plaintiff by providing inaccurate estimate of paving cost on which plaintiff based cost-sharing agreement with Ministry of Transportation — Damages of $10,000 were awarded for the plaintiff's lost opportunity to deal with the increased costs, $80,000 for loss arising from the defendant's negligent recommendation of the change order with respect to the paving method and $60,000 for defendant's approval for payment of gravel in the trench which should have been part of the unit price for pipe installation.
Action for damages for breach of contract and negligence. The plaintiff entered into a consulting services contract with the defendant to install new water mains. The Ministry of Transportation agreed to contribute $200,000 to the cost of paving. The defendant prepared an estimate of the cost to the Ministry of paving based on the unit prices. That estimate was $218,900.00 for the Ministry's share of the work. Following discussions between the parties, the scope of the Ministry paving work was changed such that the area outside the trench on the smaller local roads would receive a layer of pavement placed over the existing pavement rather than removal and replacement of the existing pavement and underlying road structure. The final estimate of the Ministry's share, after the changes to the scope of work, was $199,245. The cost sharing agreement was based on that estimate. The plaintiff argued that it relied on a negligent estimate by the defendant in making its cost-sharing agreement with the Ministry and that as a result it paid for a portion of the work that ought to have been the Ministry's responsibility. The plaintiff also alleged that excessive amounts were paid to the contractor for gravel and asphalt and that the defendant was negligent when it recommended a change in the manner of doing the work which ultimately increased the cost to the plaintiff, rather than decreasing it as the defendant had advised. 

HELD: Action allowed in part.
 The precise amount of the defendant's estimate was of significance to both parties. The estimate was negligent, in breach of the defendant's contractual duty of care. There were specific items that were excluded from the estimate that ought to have been included. The defendant was negligent in not including items of cost it knew or ought to have known were attributable to the Ministry in preparing its estimate and that amounted to negligence and a breach of the Engineering Agreement. The proper measure of damages was the loss that the plaintiff suffered by relying on a negligently prepared estimate by the defendant. It had not been shown that the impugned estimate was inaccurate other than by not including items totaling $23,900. Damages of <damage type = "sub-special">$10,000</damage> were awarded for the plaintiff's lost opportunity to deal with the increased costs before entering into the cost sharing agreement. The plaintiff had suffered a loss arising from the defendant's negligent recommendation of the change order with respect to the paving method. The evidence showed that if the cost to the plaintiff had been shown as increased rather than decreased, it would not have approved the change order. Damages of <damage type = "sub-special">$80,000</damage> were awarded for this claim. The plaintiff had not demonstrated that it had suffered a loss by the defendant's failure to monitor the asphalt quantities as required by its agreement. The evidence supported the position of the plaintiff that the approval of the defendant for payment of gravel in the trench, which should have been part of the unit price for pipe installation, amounted to negligent administration of the construction contract. Damages of <damage type = "sub-special">$60,000</damage> were awarded for this claim.
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: K. Martin, A. Wu.
Counsel for the Defendant: C.A. Wallace, K. Yawarski (A/S).
Reasons for Judgment
J.S. SIGURDSON J.
Introduction
1  The plaintiff, the Regional District of Okanagan-Similkameen (the "Regional District"), claims damages for breach of contract and negligence against Associated Engineering (B.C.) Ltd. ("Associated Engineering") arising from alleged breaches of professional duties in connection with contracts for certain roadwork performed as part of the Naramata Water Supply 2005 Improvements Project.
2  The Regional District, as part of that project, installed new water mains in roads owned by the Ministry of Transportation (the "Ministry"). The water main installation essentially consisted of excavating a trench on the roads, installing the new main, backfilling the trench, placing surface gravel and new asphalt, and doing ancillary works. The plaintiff had obtained some funding from the provincial and federal governments and also made an agreement with the Ministry that is significant in this case. Under that agreement the Ministry made a contribution of <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage> to the cost of the project and as a result the paving on the roads was generally over the full width of the road rather than repaving only part of the road by using a trench and patch system.
3  There were about 800 households connected to the water system in the affected area.
4  Regrettably, in what otherwise appears to have been a successful project, there were, from the plaintiff's perspective, some cost overruns that it says were the defendant's fault. The plaintiff says that it relied on a negligent estimate by the defendant in making its cost-sharing agreement with the Ministry and it alleges that as a result it paid for a portion of the work that ought to have been the Ministry's responsibility. The plaintiff also alleges that excessive amounts were paid to the contractor for gravel and asphalt and that the defendant was negligent when it recommended a change in the manner of doing the work which ultimately increased the cost to the plaintiff, rather than decreasing it as the defendant had advised.
5  The defendant denies that it provided a negligent estimate, or that the estimate was for the purpose the plaintiff now alleges. The defendant further denies that the plaintiff suffered any loss and says that the overall cost to the plaintiff was less than it would have been had the cost-sharing arrangement with the Ministry not been made. The defendant acknowledges that it made a mistake in costing the change order but says there was no loss suffered by the plaintiff. The defendant further says that the error made no difference and caused no loss to the plaintiff, because the change was inevitable and the Ministry had ample funds in the budget to cover the increase in the contract cost. The defendant denies that there was gravel improperly or unnecessarily paid for but says that it authorized payment for gravel to the contractor in accordance with the contract. The defendant also disputes that there was excessive asphalt or that the plaintiff has demonstrated that there was any loss in that respect.
6  This case was originally heard by another judge but he became incapacitated and was unable to deliver reasons for judgment. Accordingly, the Chief Justice assigned me to decide this case. I met with counsel and advised them that I had listened to the tapes of the trial and read the exhibits and arguments. I then had the benefit of further oral and written submissions from counsel.
Facts
7  Naramata is within the Regional District of Okanagan-Similkameen. The Regional District, at the behest of the Interior Health Authority, was directed to improve the standard of water, as it had been under a permanent boil water advisory. The plaintiff accordingly undertook a water improvement project to improve source water quality.
8  There were two main contracts on the Naramata project, one for pumps and another for piping works. When the Regional District puts in water mains, as in this project, it is required to take up the existing paving on a road if the pipe goes under that road. In this case, the affected roads are under the management and jurisdiction of the Ministry.
9  Mr. Andrew Reeder, a professional engineer, was the project manager for the Regional District.
10  In early June 2005 the plaintiff entered into a consulting services contract for the project with Associated Engineering (the "Engineering Agreement").
11  The original intention of Mr. Reeder was to use the "trench and patch" approach, which involved removing and resurfacing only the portion of a road under which the pipe is laid. However, in this period there were discussions between the defendant, the plaintiff and the Ministry concerning full width paving as opposed to trench and patch paving, as this would make a better road surface. Mr. Rusty Hewitt of the Ministry approached Mr. Reeder, and advised that the Ministry was prepared to contribute to the paving work on Ministry roads, on the basis that this would result in better roads with fewer cuts to the roads and uniform surfaces - essentially new roads - at a less than full cost to the Ministry.
12  The general idea behind the cost contribution was that instead of installing the pipes in a trench and patching over them, the new pavement would cover the entire road surface and the cost would be shared between the Regional District and the Ministry.
13  The Engineering Agreement between the Regional District and Associated Engineering contained term 1.2, which described the contractual duty and applicable standard of care as follows:
...in performing the services under this agreement, the consultant shall, at all times, act in the best interests of the Regional District and exercise that degree of professional skill, care and diligence required according to generally accepted professional planning standards applicable to the performance of such services.
14  The plaintiff asserts that that the professional services the defendant was to provide under the terms of Schedule A to the Engineering Agreement included but were not limited to the following (I will set out the plaintiff's description from its argument followed by the relevant provision of the Engineering Agreement):
working with the Regional District to control the scope of the project and to ensure that Project costs fell within the Regional District's stipulated budget:
3.5.2. The consultant shall ensure that there is a clear understanding of the conceptual works with the RDOS and the scope of the design prior to his/her commencement of the pre-design. A pre-design report must be created and submitted to the RDOS, the Interior Health Authority, and the Director of Municipal Engineering Services Branch for the Ministry of Community, Aboriginal and Women Services for review and approval.
preparing detailed design drawings, specifications, and contract packages in order to tender the Project work, including estimating the quantities for the various components of the work for the purposes of tendering a unit price contract for that work:
3.8.6. Produce drawings specifications and contract packages in order to tender the project. Drawings and specifications will accurately depict the design, constructability, safety concerns (i.e. WCB), and environmental issues. The tender packages shall include but not be limited to:
Title Pages, Index Plans, Site Plans
"Structural, Electrical, Mechanical and Civil Drawings, including all detail drawings
Controls and Instrumentation
General and Supplementary General Conditions, Form of Tender, Technical Specifications
Geotechnical Data
Agreement
preparing and submitting Class "B" cost estimates at 100% completion of the detailed design of the Project to within plus or minus 10%:
3.8.11 Submit Class "B" Cost Estimates at the following stages of Detailed Design:
"50% completion (+/- 20%)
100% completion (+/- 10%)
administering contract drawings and construction contract documents for the Water Main Replacement Work, including the change provisions thereof:
3.10.4 Review and comment on shop drawings, Change Order requests, and Progress Payment Requests. Submit all approved requests to the RDOS for processing.
full-time inspection at specific stages of the construction including backfilling and pavement placement:
3.10.8 Provision of qualified resident personnel acceptable to the Regional District, at the project site(s), to carry out the services as specified immediately below, without relieving the Contractor of his contractual and other legal obligations in respect thereof:
To inspect all pipe, material and equipment prior to installation
Full-time inspection at the time of all pipe and equipment placement
Full-time inspection at the time of bedding placement, pipe laying and back filling
Full-time inspection during pavement placement and during street pavements
Inspection during installation of all connections to water mains, sewers, manholes, valves, hydrants or services
Inspection during excavation and/or exposing of all underground services, structures, or facilities
Witness and certify the testing of water mains and equipment
Verify the validation and confirmation of UV equipment
Inspect all excavations to determine soil adequacy prior to installation of base and sub-base courses for street pavement
Inspect, adequately test, and accept each course in the installation of base sub-base courses prior to placement of the next course for street pavement.
15  In the summer of 2005, Mr. Reeder spoke to Mr. Harvey of Associated Engineering about a method to apportion costs between the Ministry and the Regional District. Associated Engineering was asked to look at a method to apportion those costs based on the width of the theoretical trench and the width of the road. Mr. Harvey created a spreadsheet and came up with a cost estimate.
16  By the end of September 2005 the Ministry had advised the Regional District that their budget to contribute to the work was around <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage>.
17  Although prices had not yet been obtained from contractors, Mr. Harvey presented the plaintiff with an estimate showing a division of 53.5% to 46.5% as the anticipated cost split between the Regional District and the Ministry, respectively.
18  In November 2005, Mr. Harvey emailed Mr. Reeder, saying that he had calculated the Ministry's portion of the paving costs at <damage type = "other">$219,000.00</damage>, noting that these were estimates and preliminary numbers.
19  By November 2005, bids from the contractors had been received and H&M Contracting Ltd ("H&M") was the low bidder on the contract for the construction of the new water supply lines. The tenders were on a unit price basis.
20  Based on the tender prices, the defendant estimated that the Ministry's share of paving costs was <damage type = "other">$218,900.00</damage>.
21  In late November 2005, Mr. Hewitt said that the Ministry's <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage> contribution figure was firm. Mr. Reeder responded that the Regional District was also not prepared to go over their estimated figure.
22  The scope of the work for the contractor to perform for the plaintiff was varied on Mr. Harvey's recommendation so that the Ministry's share of the work was under <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage>. The parties accepted this recommendation and it was agreed between the Regional District and the Ministry that outside the trench on local roads (as opposed to main roads), a layer of pavement would be put over the existing pavement (a pavement mat) rather than removing and replacing the existing pavement and underlying road structure. It was on this basis that the estimate of the Ministry's share of the work was reduced.
23  The construction contract between the Regional District and H&M was dated December 15, 2005. It was a unit price contract.
24  Under the construction contract, Associated Engineering was named the contract administrator and had certain contractually assigned duties. The provisions of the Master Municipal Construction Documents (the "MMCD") were incorporated in the unit price contract between the Regional District and H&M.
25  There was also a contract between the Regional District and the Ministry signed on December 16, 2005. It attached as Schedule A the cost estimate which provided that that Ministry's share of the cost of roadwork, engineering, and contingencies was estimated at <damage type = "other">$199,245.75</damage>. The contract also provided that "...the Province wishes for the Regional District to undertake the Upgrade utilizing full road width resurfacing of the Impacted Roads" and "... will pay, to the Regional District ... $200,000.00 in respect of the Resurfacing Works ..." and that the parties "acknowledge that the sum of <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage> is an estimate only, and agree that any funds remaining after the Resurfacing Works are complete will be utilized, as decided by mutual agreement, on other local works". The contract between the plaintiff and the Ministry also provided that in undertaking the resurfacing works the Regional District would "follow the province's "Standard Specifications for Highway Construction (2006) and all applicable and current Ministry of Transportation design standards".
26  Mr. Don Greer, of Associated Engineering, was responsible for the construction review services and contract administration on what was referred to as contract 2, the piping contract.
27  To recap, on November 24, 2005 when the bids were received, Associated Engineering prepared an estimate of the cost to the Ministry of paving based on the unit prices. That estimate, based on a division of the cost of paving shared 46.5% by the Ministry and 53.5% by the Regional District, was <damage type = "other">$218,900.00</damage> for the Ministry's share of the work. Following discussions between Mr. Harvey and Mr. Hewitt, instigated at the defendant's recommendation, the scope of the Ministry paving work was changed such that the area outside the trench on the smaller local roads would receive a layer of pavement placed over the existing pavement (a pavement mat) rather than removal and replacement of the existing pavement and underlying road structure.
28  As noted, the final estimate of the Ministry's share, after the changes to the scope of work, was <damage type = "other">$199,245.75.00</damage>. This estimate was attached as Schedule A to the December 16, 2005 agreement between the Regional District and the Ministry upon the satisfactory completion of the resurfacing works the Ministry agreed to pay <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage>.
29  After the construction contract was entered into, but before construction had begun, the contractor H&M proposed a change to deal with the existing pavement from cold milling (where existing asphalt is ground off using a milling machine) to full depth reclamation (where the asphalt is pulverized and mixed with underlying materials and reused). Asphalt reclamation involves grinding the existing asphalt with the gravel base materials, compacting it down, and then placing the mat of new asphalt on top. On the other hand, cold milling is a process whereby the asphalt is ground up and put aside for later disposal instead of mixing it with the base materials.
30  By letter of February 1, 2006, Mr. Greer of Associated Engineering recommended to Mr. Reeder that the construction contract be changed to stipulate full depth asphalt reclamation rather than cold milling. This change was recommended by the defendant and was said by the defendant to be at an additional cost of <damage type = "other">$12,725.00</damage> but the Ministry would not agree nor would the Regional District.
31  The contractor subsequently proposed a similar change on the basis that the cost would be reduced by <damage type = "other">$38,229.00</damage>. This change was recommended to the Regional District by Associated Engineering on the basis that there would not be any increase in the paving costs. The recommendation from Associated Engineering included advice that asphalt reclamation would result in savings, something that the Ministry indicated it did not care about so long as the work met the specifications.
32  Overall, the project appears to have been a success and, in fact, was an award-winning project. Further, with the agreement with the Ministry in place it appears the overall cost of the project was less than originally anticipated by the Regional District in the pre-tender estimate.
33  After the project was completed the plaintiff became concerned that the actual cost of the Ministry's share of the work was greater than estimated when the agreement with the Ministry was made, that the actual amounts paid for to the contractor for asphalt and gravel exceeded the anticipated quantities, and that the approved change order to full depth reclamation had increased costs to the estimated contract price rather than the advised reduction.
34  The defendant replied to the concerns of the plaintiff that it was normal for cost variations between the estimated and the actual quantities to occur in unit price contracts and that the overrun became evident because of the existence of the Ministry cost-sharing agreement. The defendant pointed out to the plaintiff that the actual construction costs were less than the tendered amounts including contingencies.
35  After asking the defendant to determine the share of the Ministry based on actual costs and the road as it was built, the plaintiff sent an invoice to the Ministry for an additional <damage type = "other">$175,000.00</damage> in August 2006. The Ministry refused to pay any additional amount for paving.
36  Although, the cost of full width paving was estimated at the pre-tender stage in the range of <damage type = "other">$661,000.00</damage>, the roadwork component turned out to be slightly less than that and, with the <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage> contribution from the Ministry, the Regional District did better than anticipated in terms of the cost that it would have incurred, without the Ministry involvement, even if the work had been done on a trench and patch basis.
37  In terms of the additional costs that it says it incurred, the Regional District says that the defendant failed to monitor asphalt and gravel quantities on a daily basis, and as a result the cost of those items significantly exceeded the estimates. The plaintiff says that the defendant failed to call its employee Mr. Greer to testify at trial and asserts that, if called, Mr. Greer would have confirmed that the defendant failed to monitor asphalt quantities under the construction contract. The plaintiff's position is that the gravel overage and resulting cost is explained by the fact that the payment of gravel was approved in error by the defendant as a separate item when it should in fact have been included in the unit price for pipe and as a result there was a significant overpayment to the contractor.
The Four Claims
38  The plaintiff's case was presented in four separate claims.
Claim 1
39  The plaintiff, in order to undertake full width paving, entered into the cost-sharing agreement with the Ministry that I have described. The plaintiff says that it asked the defendant to prepare an estimate and a basis on which the cost of the work was to be shared with the Ministry. The plaintiff says that the defendant negligently estimated the cost of the work that the Regional District performed for the benefit of the Ministry. As I have described, rather than installing water mains while only disturbing and repaving a portion of the asphalt on the Ministry roads, the Regional District negotiated an agreement with the Ministry whereby funds were provided so that after construction the full width of the Ministry roads would receive new pavement. The defendant proposed a formula which all parties accepted for sharing the costs, based on a proportional share of the paved road area, with 53.5% borne by the plaintiff and 46.5% borne by the Ministry. The plaintiff says it suffered a loss because the cost it incurred in performing the Ministry's portion of work exceeded the defendant's estimate of the cost of that work.
40  The plaintiff claims that the estimate given by the defendant as to the cost of the Ministry's share of the roadwork, attached as Schedule A to the agreement between the Regional District and the Ministry, was negligent. The plaintiff argues that the estimated share of costs of the Ministry should have been <damage type = "other">$223,900.00</damage>, rather than the estimate prepared by the defendant which was approximately <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage> (the amount of the Ministry contribution). The alleged error in the estimate lay in not including some of the costs of the roadwork that the defendant knew would have to be incurred, resulting in an underestimate of the cost of the Ministry's share of the paving.
41  Based on field measurements of the work that was actually done, the plaintiff claims that an additional 9% of the paving should be attributed to the Ministry for its portion of the road. The plaintiff asserts that the proper assessment of the value of the additional scope of work done by the Regional District from which the Ministry benefitted, above its <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage> contribution, was <damage type = "other">$74,525.00</damage>. Taking into account the 9% shift that the plaintiff says reflects the proper distribution of the costs, the plaintiff claims the sum of <damage type = "other">$81,232.00</damage>. This is what it says are the increased costs paid by the Regional District for the benefit of the Ministry resulting from the negligent estimate. The plaintiff asserts that this sum represents the value of additional pavement restoration outside the trench on local roads.
42  The defendant denies that its estimate was negligent or that the plaintiff has suffered any loss. The defendant says that the plaintiff suffered no loss because it anticipated that the paving work, a small part of a much larger contract, would cost at least <damage type = "other">$586,187.00</damage> and perhaps as much as <damage type = "other">$655,000.00</damage>, before the Ministry contribution of <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage>. The defendant points to the report of its expert James Greatbanks, a professional engineer. He estimated the price of the roadworks for a trench and patch project would be <damage type = "other">$586,187.25</damage>, that the actual cost of the project on a full depth reclamation basis was <damage type = "other">$665,349.90</damage> and that with the contribution of <damage type = "other">$200,000</damage> from the Ministry the actual cost of paving that the plaintiff incurred was about <damage type = "other">$467,000.00</damage>. This, the defendant says, is about <damage type = "other">$120,000</damage> less than the plaintiff would have spent on a trench and patch approach to the contract had the plaintiff done the job without the contribution of the Ministry. The defendant says this is the context that must be examined in order to determine if there was any loss suffered by the plaintiff.
43  The defendant denies that the estimate of the Ministry's portion of the work was negligent and says that the estimate was reasonable for the intended purpose. The defendant says it had a dual duty - first to ensure that the plaintiff would not pay more than it would have paid to do the work without the Ministry's involvement and contribution, and second "to see that the Ministry got value for its contribution to the project".
44  The defendant denies that it was negligent and says that the estimate fulfilled the purpose for which it was sought, which was to obtain a contribution from the Ministry of <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage> for the paving work which resulted in the costs incurred by the plaintiff being only about <damage type = "other">$467,000.00</damage>.
45  Additionally, though the defendant denies that the estimate was negligent, it contends that based on the evidence it introduced about the actual work done, the value of the work attributable to the Ministry would be less than, not more than, $200,000.00. In this respect it relies on the report of its expert, Mr. Greatbanks, which states that the share of the pavement surface costs attributable to the plaintiff should actually be in the range of about 71 to 88 percent.
Claim 2
46  The second claim is that the defendant negligently prepared and recommended a change order (change order No. 2) that was requested by the contractor. In doing so, the defendant advised the plaintiff that the change would result in a cost savings when in fact the cost of the asphalt work increased and both the plaintiff's and the Ministry's portion were impacted. Although the change order suggested a savings of $38,229.00, the plaintiff says that the defendant should have predicted a cost increase.
47  The evidence indicates that the result of approving change order No. 2 was to increase the cost of the pavement restoration by <damage type = "other">$91,812.00</damage>. The plaintiff's claim No. 2 is for <damage type = "other">$51,046.00</damage> which is calculated as the additional cost of <damage type = "other">$91,812.00</damage> less the reclamation costs of <damage type = "other">$40,766.00</damage> [$37,400.00 +9%], which it asserts is already included in claim 1 as the cost of the additional work required to undertake full depth reclamation instead of cold milling. However, if for any reason claim No. 1 is unsuccessful the plaintiff says the total of the claim for the negligent advice in connection with change order No. 2 should be the full <damage type = "other">$91,812.00</damage>.
48  The defendant does not deny that there was an error in recommending the change order as a less costly alternative, but says the plaintiff suffered no loss. First, the defendant says that there was more than enough money from the Ministry's $200,000.00 contribution to pay for the increase in the contract price due to change order No. 2, and the agreement between the Ministry and the Regional District contemplated that all of the Ministry's contribution would be used by the plaintiff.
49  Moreover, the defendant says that the second claim also fails because the change was inevitable and therefore the error caused the plaintiff no loss. The defendant says the change and increased cost was inevitable because the contract called for a particular base course which was contrary to Ministry specifications and the change order would have had to be made in any event. As such, the defendant says that the plaintiff has not proven that the work could have been done for a lesser price.
Claim 3
50  The third claim arises from the alleged failure of the defendant to satisfy its obligation to monitor the delivery of material by the contractor and prevent cost overruns. The plaintiff claims the sum of $27,650.00 for the total amount of asphalt paid to the contractor that was more than 10% in excess of the engineer's estimated quantities. The calculation of this claim is based on the cost of the actual quantity of asphalt, which is $305,640.00 less $277,989.80 (110% of the cost based on estimated quantities of $252,718.00).
51  As to this claim, the defendant denies that the plaintiff suffered a loss or that the claim has been proven.
Claim 4
52  Fourth, the plaintiff claims the sum of <damage type = "other">$83,194.00</damage>, which it says it improperly paid to the contractor as a result of the defendant's approval for payment to the contractor for gravel. The plaintiff's argument is that the gravel ought to have been included and paid for in the unit price for pipe, and the defendant negligently approved payment for the gravel in the trench as an additional item.
53  The defendant says the approval by its engineer for payment for gravel was proper and in accordance with the correct interpretation of the contract, which allowed for payment of gravel in the trench separately from the pipe, and thus that the plaintiff suffered no loss.
Discussion
54  The plaintiff's claim is in negligence and breach of contract for breaching the duty of care described in the Engineering Agreement.
55  There is generally no dispute that the defendant was required to exercise that degree of professional skill, care, and diligence required according to generally accepted professional standards. There are some particular provisions of the agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant that are relevant to some of the claims. However, the defendant disputes the characterization of the duty with respect to the estimate that is the subject of claim No. 1, and says that it fulfilled its particular duty it had with respect to the estimate.
56  This case presents some difficult questions regarding the extent to which the plaintiff has proven damages from the defendant's alleged breaches of its duty of care.
Claim No. 1
57  The issue in this first claim is the nature and existence of the duty of the defendant, whether the standard of care was met and, to the extent that it was not, whether the plaintiff has proven any loss.
58  The plaintiff's claim is that it entered into the cost-sharing agreement with the Ministry in reliance on what it alleges was a negligent estimate by the defendant of the Ministry's share of the cost of paving.
59  The defendant prepared an estimate that ultimately was attached to the agreement between the plaintiff and the Ministry under which the Ministry contributed <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage>. It showed an estimated cost for the plaintiff performing the Ministry work of $199.250.00 based on a division of cost (based on a theoretical trench) between the Ministry and the Regional District of 46.5% for the Ministry and 53.5% for the Regional District.
60  The defendant acknowledges that some items were missing from the estimate but says that the plaintiff's case is flawed in that it misconceives the purpose of the estimate. The defendant says that its duty was not to estimate the particular share of cost with specificity but to ensure that (a) the plaintiff was not out of pocket in its dealing with the Ministry and that (b) the Ministry's share of the cost was properly spent. Mr. Wallace, counsel for the defendant, contended that the defendant satisfied the duty that it owed to the plaintiff and the Ministry.
61  The defendant says that the objective of the agreement with the Ministry was cost neutrality. The Regional District was not looking to make a profit out of its deal with the Ministry, but it did not want to pay any portion of the Ministry's cost. Mr. Wallace argues that the issue is not the meaning of the agreement between the Regional District and the Ministry but whether Associated Engineering met its duty to its client the Regional District, and the crux of that question is whether it acted reasonably in all the circumstances. Mr. Wallace says that it was never intended that the costs of the parties be ascribed on the basis of a theoretical trench such as the one underlying the estimate. The estimate was simply used to arrive at a number and to obtain the <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage> from the Ministry. The defendant suggests that its duty was to prepare an estimate that ensured that the Regional District was not out of pocket as a result of the cost-sharing agreement, as compared to doing the project without the contribution of the Ministry.
62  Mr. Wallace says that the plaintiff is trying to manufacture a case where there is none and cannot obscure the obvious fact that it got what it wanted out of its arrangement with the Ministry -- a win-win result.
63  The history of the negotiations between the Ministry and the plaintiff shows that Associated Engineering suggested a proportionate share approach based on the theoretical width of the trench. In support of the position that the estimated trench fulfilled its role, to get the full amount of the proposed contribution by the Ministry, Mr. Harvey says that in effect the size of the trench was determinative of the Regional District's share. He suggests that an estimate with a more realistic trench (a wider trench) would have shown a greater percentage of the cost allocated to the Regional District. I did not see that Mr. Harvey was seriously challenged on his evidence that the trench was an aggressive calculation designed to give some advantage in the calculation to the Regional District.
64  However, I do not find the defendant's version of the alleged duty to be supported by the evidence. I do not accept the argument that the plaintiff's case misconceives the significance or purpose of the estimate. The evidence as a whole shows that the estimate was not simply a rough vehicle to justify or rationalize the Ministry's contribution to the project but was used to allocate the costs between the parties. The parties negotiated the scope of project work based on the estimates done by the defendant. As the variation to the proposed agreement between the Ministry and the Regional District demonstrates, the estimated amount of the Ministry work was used to shape, and in that case in fact reduce, the scope of the work to keep the contribution of the Ministry at <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage>.
65  It is clear from the negotiations that the parties, including the plaintiff, were conducting themselves and negotiating the cost-sharing agreement on the strength of the defendant's estimate.
66  I find that the evidence shows that the plaintiff did not want to pay for the work that it felt was the responsibility of the Ministry. The Ministry, while it was prepared to contribute <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage> to the project, was prepared to and did reduce the scope of the work to its benefit rather than increasing the amount of its contribution. In that respect, the evidence shows that the precise amount of the defendant's estimate was of significance to both parties.
67  The parties' pattern of dealing with the estimates shows the reliance that both the plaintiff and the Ministry placed on the estimate. Accordingly, I find that the defendant owed the plaintiff a duty to use reasonable care in preparing its estimate of the share of the cost of the paving project between the plaintiff and the Ministry. I find that I do not have to conclude whether the defendant owed a duty of care to the Ministry as well.
68  I turn to the next issue; whether the estimate was negligent, in breach of the defendant's contractual duty of care.
69  The argument of the plaintiff is straightforward. It says that there were items related to the cost of the work for the Ministry that clearly ought to have been included in the estimate. The plaintiff adduced the expert evidence of Mr. Tom Hunt of McElhanney Engineering. His evidence was that the estimate excluded items that should have been included which would have put the estimate over <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage>. I need not set them out; the fact that they were not included but related to the Ministry's share is not in dispute.
70  The evidence shows that Mr. Harvey was aware when he did the estimate that it left out certain essential items, and he was aware that there was a risk that the plaintiff would have to pay more than <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage> for the Ministry work.
71  I accept the evidence of the plaintiff's expert that, had the estimate been done properly, the additional items would have been included. Those items, if included, meant that the defendant's second estimate, the one alleged to be negligent, should have been 12% higher for a total of $223,900.00 for the work relating to the Ministry.
72  An argument that must be addressed is how the estimate could be said to be negligent when it was only out by 12%, and plaintiff must have known, and I find did know, that estimates have some leeway. On that basis, it might be argued that the estimate was within a reasonable range and therefore was not negligent. However, the issue in the case at bar is not what a reasonable estimate of certain costs was but whether certain costs ought to have been included in developing the estimate. I accept the evidence of the plaintiff's expert witness Mr. Hunt that there were specific items that were excluded that ought to have been included, and I find that this error is recognized by the defendant and is not simply a matter of estimation or approximation.
73  There is no evidence that the estimate, at the time, of the division of work between the plaintiff and Ministry could be said to be negligent. The evidence at trial differs on whether the cost for the Ministry's share of the work was ultimately greater or less than $200,000.00. However, apart from some missing items in the estimate that I have discussed, there is no basis to suggest, nor is any alleged, that the estimate was otherwise negligent.
74  Moreover, I find that even if the defendant prepared a conservative trench (or an intentionally narrow theoretical trench) for estimating cost allocation to ensure that the full <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage> was contributed by the Ministry, it would not be an answer to the plaintiff's complaint about the estimate. I find that the defendant did not tell the plaintiff that the estimate was generous to ensure the Ministry contribution was received, that cost items attributable to the Ministry were being left out or that there was a serious risk that the Ministry costs might well exceed the estimate.
75  The significance of the precision of the estimate was clear to the defendant. When it was <damage type = "other">$19,000.00</damage> over the figure of <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage>, the estimate was relied on in order to adjust the work in the agreement between the Ministry and the Regional District to reduce the cost of the work for the Ministry to <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage>.
76  Accordingly, I find that the defendant was negligent in not including items of cost it knew or ought to have known were attributable to the Ministry in preparing its estimate, and that amounted to negligence and a breach of the Engineering Agreement.
77  The more difficult question is the assessment of damages.
78  The plaintiff's position on damages is based on what it says is the proper division of the cost of the work between the plaintiff and the Ministry. The plaintiff says that had the estimate not been done negligently (and the missing items had been included) there would have been a revision in the scope of the work (as there had been when the first estimate of the Ministry's share was over <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage>) and that the damages should be based on what the plaintiff says is a more accurate division of the respective costs between the plaintiff and the Ministry.
79  The plaintiff argues that its damages should be based on the work that it says it did for the benefit of the Ministry over and above the negligent estimate. It says that damages should be based on the analysis by the defendant at the end of the job of the actual cost, plus 9% to account for what the plaintiff asserts is the correct division of cost between the plaintiff and Ministry.
80  The damage claim by the plaintiff in respect of its first claim is explained by its expert witness Mr. Hunt, at pages 31 to 32 of his report:
Associated's calculation for area of pavement removed for the entire site was correct. During project delivery, Associated as the Contract Administrator should have protected the integrity of the funding agreement between the Regional District and the Ministry. It was clear that only <damage type = "other">$200,000</damage> worth of work should be provided for Ministry pavement upgrades. The Ministry was prepared to accept a pavement restoration program that limited the work to the cap of <damage type = "other">$200,000</damage>.
As indicated earlier in this report, the change from cold milling of the asphalt surface on Robinson Avenue and Naramata Road only and pavement overlays on local roads, to full depth reclamation of asphalt and base gravels on all roads was at an increased cost. The work ultimately completed by the contractor resulted in a new pavement structure for all roads. The Ministry, by capping their funding, originally accepted a reduced pavement structure for all roads except Robinson Avenue and Naramata Road. In the end the Ministry got the full benefit of the original scope of work (at time of tender), with a <damage type = "other">$200,000</damage> cap.
Based on MCSL's original estimates for pavement restoration attributable to the Ministry, the Ministry received additional benefits for all local roads as follows:
* 6,875 m[2](area of local roads) cold milling (total MoT pavement area highlighted in dark blue on page 12 less highlighted light green amounts in the same column) @ $$5.44/m[2] (reclamation negotiated price for pavement removal) for a total of $37,400
* 100 mm depth of 25 mm Base Course gravel for the same 6,875 m[2] (6875 x 0.100 = 687.5 m[3]) @ $54/m[3] for a total of <damage type = "other">$37,125</damage>.
The total of <damage type = "other">$74,525</damage>, based on reclamation unit price for pavement removal, is the added benefit to the Ministry. However, this does not take into consideration the 9% shift in the cost share formula indicated earlier in the report. The 9% shift would result in further increased benefit to <damage type = "other">$81,232</damage>. This total also does not address any quantity overruns and there are no cost allocations associated with additional depths for gravel and pavement over all roads.
The change from cold milling to full depth asphalt reclamation provided a higher standard of road for the Ministry improvements and will reduce maintenance costs to the Ministry over the life cycle of the road. Maintenance costs will be reduced and reconstruction costs will be deferred for many years.
The assignment of costs for the pavement restoration was confirmed in the Regional District's and Ministry's agreement, which assigned 53.5% to the Regional District and 46.5% to the Ministry based on area calculations. Associated's method for calculating the areas and costs were appropriate. After construction, a detailed calculation based on field measurements revised the cost share formula and shifted 9% more of the cost to the Ministry. This shift in cost allocations and final constructed quantities resulted in costs to the Ministry well in excess of the funding cap of <damage type = "other">$200,000</damage>. The Ministry also received a higher standard of road construction.
81  The plaintiff's argument appears to be that adjustments would (or could) have been made to the agreement between the plaintiff and the Ministry had the plaintiff known the correct estimate of the cost of the Ministry portion of the work. The plaintiff says that based on the actual value of the work undertaken for the Ministry and the appropriate share of costs between the plaintiff and the Ministry, the measure of damages should be <damage type = "other">$81,232.00</damage>.
82  I disagree with the plaintiff. In my view, the proper measure of damages is the loss that the plaintiff suffered by relying on a negligently prepared estimate by the defendant.
83  Had the plaintiff and the Ministry been told by the defendant at the time of the estimate that the Ministry share of the work was going to be 12% more than the amount that the Ministry was then prepared to contribute, a number of things might have occurred. The plaintiff could have sought a greater amount of contribution from the Ministry. The plaintiff could have reduced the scope of work by agreement with the Ministry so the Ministry portion was within a <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage> estimate. The plaintiff might have determined that in all the circumstances a <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage> contribution to the project by the Ministry was a sufficient contribution to the project and decided to generally go ahead with the full width paving on the basis that it in in fact did.
84  I do not think that the fact that this project turned out well from the perspective of the Regional District because of the contribution of the Ministry means that the plaintiff suffered no damages. The defendant says there is no loss because actual percent of work attributable to the plaintiff was higher, and the overall cost to the plaintiff was less than it would have been if the Ministry had not been involved. The defendant's expert Mr. Greatbanks said:
By my calculation, using the as built drawings 71.3% of the pavement surface would have been lost to a trench and patch approach and, using the contract drawings 88.0% of the pavement surface would have been lost to a trench and patch approach.
As determined from the final progress payment the full depth reclamation costs were <damage type = "other">$655,349.90</damage> (exhibit 4).
Using the as built drawings 71.3% would be attributable to the RDOS (<damage type = "other">$467,264.47</damage>) and 28.7% would be attributable to the Ministry (<damage type = "other">$188,085.43</damage>).
Using the contract drawings 88% would be attributable to the RDOS (<damage type = "other">$576,707.91</damage>) and 12% would be attributable to the Ministry (<damage type = "other">$78,641.99</damage>).
85  I accept that the evidence shows that the cost of the roadwork project to the plaintiff without the Ministry's contribution would have been higher than it was. However, that does not mean that the plaintiff has not suffered a loss as a result of the negligent estimate. The plaintiff had negotiated a contribution from the Ministry. It is entitled to the benefit of that contribution and is entitled to damages for any loss that it may have suffered from relying on the negligent estimate in entering its agreement with the Ministry.
86  It has not been shown that the impugned estimate was inaccurate other than by not including items that total <damage type = "other">$23,900.00</damage>. The complaint of the plaintiff under this particular claim is not that the estimate of the division of paving between the plaintiff and the Ministry was calculated negligently, or that the overall cost was not properly estimated, but only that the estimate that was relied on by the plaintiff was lower than it ought to have been by the cost of the excluded items, totalling <damage type = "other">$23,900.00</damage>.
87  The question is what loss, if any, the plaintiff suffered by relying on the negligent estimate. Clearly the cost to the plaintiff was lower than it would have been without the Ministry contribution, but that I do not think is the issue. The plaintiff was entitled to receive careful advice from its engineer in negotiating its agreement with the Ministry.
88  I find that the evidence shows that if a non-negligent estimate had been made the project would have gone ahead with the Ministry contribution. The result of an non-negligent estimate might have been some modification of the scope of the work to reduce the cost of the work done for the Ministry, perhaps some greater contribution by the Ministry, or perhaps acceptance by the plaintiff of the possible additional share of the cost in recognition of the financial benefit to the project of the <damage type = "other">$200,000.00</damage> contribution from the Ministry. In determining damages, I have to assess the value of that lost opportunity to the plaintiff.
89  Doing the best I can on the evidence I find that the plaintiff has lost a real opportunity by the error in the estimate but I find the loss is not in the range suggested by the plaintiff. Taking into account the contingencies that I have described, I assess damages for this claim at <damage type = "sub-special">$10,000.00</damage>.
Claim No. 2
90  The defendant had an obligation to review and comment on change order requests from the contractor. That much is not in dispute.
91  It is acknowledged by the defendant that it erred in recommending change order No. 2 to the plaintiff when the defendant ought to have known that the cost would be greater but told the plaintiff it would be less.
92  According to the plaintiff, the effect of the admitted error was not simply an increase in costs of <damage type = "other">$47,000.00</damage> above the contract price but, according to the expert witness Mr. Hunt, it was to increase the cost of the pavement restoration by <damage type = "other">$91,812</damage>. This takes into account the earlier scope of work change following the initial estimates and according to the plaintiff also takes into account a detailed analysis of the impact of the move to full depth reclamation.
93  Mr. Hunt, explains this claim at para. 26 of his report:
Change Order #2 prepared by Associated, included on page 28, indicates a reduction in the overall contract price of $38,229. However, the Regional District and the Ministry signed an agreement earlier that effectively reduced the scope of work for pavement restoration in the amount of $122,041. MCSL's worksheet entitled "Change Order #2" on page 27 provides the net effect this change has on the reduced contract price after the $200,000 Ministry cap is applied. Change Order # 2 should have been reviewed by Associated on the basis of the reduced contract scope. If this had occurred, Change Order #2 would have resulted in a net increase to the contract price by $91,812. Not the reduced value of $38,229. As well, this additional scope increased the cost for Ministry works because the Regional District's and Ministry's agreement had already eliminated the need to remove the asphalt on local roads and also increased the cost for pavement removal on Robinson Avenue and Naramata Road from $3.70/m2 to $5.44 m2.
The e-mails included on page 21 and 22, indicate that the Regional District was not prepared to pay more for the change proposed by the contractor for pavement restoration. However, it appears that the contractor was basing their projected cost savings on the original contract quantities, while the signed agreement between the Regional District and the Ministry reduced the contract quantities and resulting costs for pavement restoration.
Associated was aware of the reduction in the overall project quantities as they were the Contract Administrator and they prepared the quantity schedule and cost included in the Regional District's and Ministry's signed agreement. It appears that the reduced contract value for the reduced scope of work resulting from the Regional District's and Ministry's agreement was never formally communicated by Associated to the general contractor, otherwise the alternative pavement restoration program would have resulted in an increase in the contract value not a decrease as indicated by the issuance of Change Order #2.
94  The plaintiff says that the additional cost on the local roads is already included in its first claim, in the amount of <damage type = "other">$40,766.00</damage>, and if claim No. 2 is allowed in full that amount should be deducted so that it is not duplicated in this part of the award.
95  The plaintiff says, and I find that the evidence supports, that it would not have approved any requested change by the contractor that increased costs.
96  The defendant essentially makes two points in answer to the claim that the plaintiff has suffered increased costs as a result of the change order: (1) that it was inevitable, and (2) that there was no loss because there was ample money in the budget from the Ministry to do this work.
97  I will deal with the latter point first. The argument is that even with the change order, the cost of the Ministry portion of the work based on the as-built drawings is less, according to Mr. Greatbanks, than $200,000.00. According to Mr. Greatbanks, the cost of the roadwork using a cold milling approach, accounting for the need to dispose of the millings and import base course, would have been $664,607.00.
98  I do not think there is merit to the defendant's argument that the plaintiff suffered no damage because there was money in the budget from the Ministry to cover this work and the agreement with the Ministry provided that all of its money would be used. The change order in question took place after the main contract was in place and after the agreement with the Ministry had been entered into by the Regional District. While the agreement that the Regional District had reached with the Ministry was clearly beneficial to the plaintiff, it was entitled to the benefit of that agreement as well as the benefit of its agreement with the contractor. It has not been shown by the defendant that the increased cost of this work was somehow covered by the Ministry money. The agreement with the Ministry, and amount of the contribution the plaintiff was to receive from the Ministry, were in place when the impugned change order was recommended.
99  I think the only real defence of merit to this claim is whether the plaintiff has proven that it suffered a loss by the defendant's error or whether, as the defendant puts it, the move to full depth reclamation was inevitable such that the change order would have been required regardless of increased cost.
100  The defendant's argument was that although the contract called for millings or "well-graded base course" to be used in the base course, this was contrary to the Ministry specifications and millings would not meet the requirement for well-graded base course. Since the millings were not permitted under the specifications and because the agreement between the Regional District and the Ministry requires the Regional District to follow Ministry specifications, the plaintiff would have had to accept a change order for the cost of their disposal. In other words, the change order of which the plaintiff complains would have come about in any event.
101  The plaintiff disputes that the move to full depth reclamation was inevitable. It says that the evidence shows that the change order was not inevitable. In particular, the plaintiff points to, (a) the notes of a September 2005 meeting that indicated that the Ministry would prefer to have the existing surface course milled throughout the project and reused as a base course and (b) the fact that attached as Schedule A to the Ministry agreement with the Regional District is the phrase "cold milling -- to full depth and re-spread as base course".
102  I find that the evidence shows that change order No. 2 was not inevitable.
103  The evidence persuades me that the plaintiff has suffered a loss arising from the negligent recommendation of the change order. The evidence shows that if the cost to the Regional District had been shown as increased rather than decreased, it would not have approved the change order.
104  I find the evidence of Mr. Hunt also supports the position that millings are acceptable for use as an alternative material to well-graded base course provided that it is approved by the Ministry, which I find to be the case in this instance. There was no evidence that cold-milling was unacceptable to the Ministry. In fact, the evidence indicates the reverse. The plaintiff's counsel asks me to draw an adverse inference from the fact that Mr. Greer of the defendant and the responsible party would have given evidence if the change was inevitable. I find that I need not draw an adverse inference from his failure to testify, as on the evidence I am satisfied the change was not inevitable. The plaintiff is therefore entitled to damages for the loss it suffered from the negligent preparation and advice in connection with this change order.
105  In terms of damages, the plaintiff conceded that if I awarded the amount of the first claim I should deduct an amount from the second claim to avoid duplication. As I assessed damages under the first claim at <damage type = "sub-special">$10,000.00</damage>, I allow this claim in the amount of <damage type = "sub-special">$80,000.00</damage> to avoid duplication.
Claim No. 3
106  The plaintiff asserts that under the Engineering Agreement the defendant was required to provide inspection services, and that under the incorporated conditions in the MMCD the quantities provided by the contractor were to be measured by the defendant, as the contract administrator, on a daily basis. The allegation is that the asphalt quantities were significantly over the estimated amounts in the construction contract, that they were reasonable estimates at the time but that as a result of the defendant's breach of contract the plaintiff paid more than it ought to have paid for asphalt.
107  The claim is for <damage type = "other">$27,650.00</damage>.
108  The Engineering Agreement requires the defendant to provide an estimate of quantities at the time of the tender within a range of plus or minus 10%.
109  Although the claim is explained by the plaintiff's expert in terms of the alleged share of the cost between the Ministry and the plaintiff, the claim here is really for the asphalt overage that was caused by the alleged breach of contract by the defendant. The plaintiff's claim is for the cost of additional asphalt that exceeded 10% over the estimate. In his expert report, Mr. Hunt describes the claim as the amount paid for asphalt (<damage type = "other">$305,640.00</damage>) less the amount of 110% of the estimate (<damage type = "other">$277,989.00</damage>) equalling an amount of <damage type = "other">$27,650.00</damage>.
110  Mr. Hunt described this asphalt overrun claim as follows:
A brief review of the tender quantities related to final payment quantities indicated that the original estimates by Associated were reasonable but quantities for asphalt and 25 mm Base Course gravel had overruns.
There appears to be an excess of asphalt placed on the site over what was required under the contract terms. Much of this additional pavement is in areas outside of the Regional District's restoration work and has been allocated, by Associated, to the Ministry's portion of the work. The contract required the contractor to weigh the asphalt and make payment by the tonne. The depths of asphalt recorded during quality control testing does not equate to the tonnage of asphalt actually placed. Based on the document review completed by MCSL there is no explanation for the overrun.
...
The first area of concern is the quantity of asphalt placed on the project. MCSL's estimated asphalt quantity for Robinson Avenue and Naramata Road for Ministry pavement restoration was 758 tonnes (worksheet page 12 column entitled MoT Pavement (t) shaded in light green). Similarly, the Ministry's share of asphalt required on local roads was 826 tonnes (worksheet page 12 same column as listed above with orange shaded number minus light green) for a combined total of 1,584 tonnes. MCSL and Associated both assumed each cubic metre of asphalt weighted 2.4 tonnes (reference A #2339). Quality control testing during construction confirmed that each cubic meter of asphalt was 2.3 tonnes/m3 (reference A #3555 to #3557) which is 4.3% lighter. Applying this factor to the estimated volumes results in the total estimated asphalt volume for Robinson Avenue and Naramata Road at 727 tonnes and local roads at 792 tonnes (1,519 combined). As provided by Associated in Schedule A to the Regional District's and Ministry's agreement (insert Schedule A page 7), the Ministry's share of asphalt for local roads was estimated at 960 tonnes and the Ministry's share for Robinson Avenue and Naramata Road was 630 tonnes for a combined total of 1,590 tonnes for all Ministry roads. The actual quantity of asphalt placed on all Ministry shared roads was 2074 tonnes (insert page 30). This means that the asphalt quantities actually placed on the Ministry's portions for road upgrades were 36% greater than the original volumes estimated by MCSL and Associated.
The contract quality control program included asphalt core tests, which records actual pavement thicknesses (reference A #3555 to #3557) showed an average thickness for this project at 56 mm rather than the 50 mm specified in the contract. This equates to a 12% overrun on asphalt volume throughout the project. The total estimated asphalt overrun on Ministry roads is 36%. As indicated earlier in the report, the cost sharing distribution between the Regional District and the Ministry increased the Ministry's share of pavement restoration by 9%. The 12% overrun in depth of asphalt plus the 9% shift in responsibility identifies 21% of the 36% increase in the Ministry asphalt quantities. Nothing in the documentation explains the 15% difference. For pavement restoration works, constructed quantities are generally within +/- 5% of the quantity estimates provided at time of tender.
111  According to the plaintiff's argument, the effect of what Mr. Hunt is saying is simply that the total cost of the asphalt for the project was <damage type = "other">$305.640.00</damage>, which exceeded the estimated quantities of <damage type = "other">$252,718.00</damage> by <damage type = "other">$42,922.00</damage>, or 21%.
112  The plaintiff says that the explanation for the overrun of asphalt is threefold: (1) increased thickness of the pavement from the original design (asphalt core tests showed average thickness for the project at 56 mm rather than 50, an increase of 12%); (2) the original road dimensions contained errors (which was admitted by Mr. Greer of the defendant); and (3) the lack of monitoring created a situation in which quantities which were not placed onsite could be billed for.
113  The plaintiff's counsel argues that under the Engineering Agreement the defendant was required to provide full-time inspection services during the placement of the bedding pipe backfilling and pavement to ensure compliance with the construction contract. The plaintiff's counsel also argues that the defendant was required to collect sufficient information to ensure all components and features not observable from the surface were recorded. The plaintiff argues that section 1.1.3 of the MMCD, which contained the measurement and payment provisions incorporated into the contract with the contractor, required the weight measurements for all items delivered by truck to be verified by weight slips and all quantities to be measured on a daily basis.
114  The plaintiff says that they requested that quantities be checked and received information that the quantities were on track. Mr. Greer, in his affidavit in response to interrogatories, said he did not recall if weight tickets were collected on a daily basis or not.
115  The plaintiff's expert said this at pages 35 and 36 of his report:
Where full time contract administration services are not provided, which includes quantity surveyors and full time measurement staff, as is the case for this project, prudent engineering would dictate that the contract documents be prepared to recognize the reduced level of engineering services and alternative measurement and payment procedures would be defined to amend the MMCD payment method. Contract documents are often modified to specify measurement and payment by surface area, which allows quantities to be determined after construction. This also ensures the contractor does not get paid for placing a thicker mat of asphalt than what is specified in the contract. Associated's project management contract with the Regional District had shared inspection services between two contracts at the same time. This project clearly has a large overrun on the pavement quantities and gravel quantities resulting in additional payment to the contractor of <damage type = "other">$135,410</damage> over the expected scope of work provided in the original schedule of quantities, at time of tender.
...
As Associated did not have a full service contract with the Regional District, which would have provided sufficient resources to measure quantities and collect all supplied weigh tickets during construction, payment items in the contract should have been redefined to allow measurements of finished products by area. This would eliminate the additional payment for asphalt and gravel, as neat line calculations would be the basis for payment regardless of the work performed by the contractor.
116  Although the plaintiff has shown that the asphalt was thicker than required in spots, the evidence also indicates that this complaint must be tempered to some degree by the fact that the density of the asphalt was slightly below the contractual requirement. If the density conformed to specification, the thickness of the asphalt would be reduced, at least to some degree.
117  The plaintiff has to demonstrate that it has suffered a loss by the defendant's failure to monitor the asphalt quantities as required by its agreement.
118  From the plaintiff's expert, the precise nature of the duty of the defendant in these circumstances is unclear. The expert suggests that when engineering services are not provided prudent engineering would require modification of contract documents to allow quantities to be determined after construction.
119  Although the plaintiff has probably shown that there was more asphalt laid than estimated, I am not satisfied on the evidence that the plaintiff has proven that it suffered a loss because it has not shown to my satisfaction that the project could have been done at a cost for asphalt significantly different than it was or that the failure of the defendant to provide proper monitoring of the asphalt has resulted in increased cost to the plaintiff.
120  Accordingly, I find that this claim has not been proven on the evidence.
Claim No. 4
121  I turn now to Claim No. 4, the gravel claim. It is similar to the asphalt claim in that the plaintiff claims it paid for more gravel for the project than it should have, but involves a different matter of contractual interpretation.
122  The plaintiff claims the sum of <damage type = "other">$83,194.00</damage> on the basis that payment to the contractor for gravel was approved by the defendant when it ought not to have been. The issue comes down to a question of whether the proper interpretation of the contractual documents identifies certain gravel as a separate item for which payment should be made to the contractor, as it apparently was, or whether some of the gravel was not a separate pay item but should have been included in the unit price for pipe and thus payments were improperly authorized by the defendant.
123  The plaintiff's position is that the gravel should not have been authorized for payment to the contractor because it was included in the cost items for pipe.
124  Mr. Hunt expressed the claim this way in his report:
In addition, the 25 mm Base Course gravel quantity is excessive. The 25 mm Base Course gravel final quantity is close to the total volume of gravel required under all pavements, which is contrary to the contract specifications. Gravel was supplied and placed based on volume calculated in m3. Associated's original estimates provided sufficient quantities to cover the entire pavement restoration areas. However, gravel placed within trenches is considered part of the watermain installation cost as defined in MMCD and if paid separately, may explain why there was a large overrun in gravel. Contractors are not usually paid for work done beyond the scope specified. The MMCD measurement and payment clause is inserted below:
125  As stated, the answer to this claim depends on the interpretation of the appropriate provision for payment under the contract. Although Mr. Hunt's evidence on the meaning of the contract may be admissible on the issue of the appropriate standard of care for contract administration by an engineer, it is not admissible in my view on the question of the proper meaning of the contract. However, it is perhaps of some assistance in explaining why there was a large difference between the estimated quantity for gravel and the amount for which the contractor was paid.
126  Mr. Hunt said: "...gravel placed within trenches is considered part of the watermain installation cost as defined in MMCD and if paid separately, may explain why there was a large overrun in gravel."
127  The plaintiff's argument is that measurement and payment are contractually required to be in accordance with the MMCD. As set out in Mr. Hunt's report, the relevant provision reads:
1.8 Measurement and Payment.
1 Payment for watermain will be made separately for various sections of watermain consistent with; pipe materials and diameters, depths of mains and backfill requirements shown on Contract Drawings and described under the individual payment items in the Schedule of Quantities and Prices.
2 Payment for watermain and service connection include saw cutting pavement, trench elevation, disposal of surplus excavated material bedding, supply and installation of all pipe, bolts, gaskets and tie rods, imported or native backfill as shown on the Drawings, cleaning, pressure and leakage testing, flushing, disinfection, all surface restoration as specified under Section 02223 - Sub-section 3.6, except permanent pavement restoration, and el other work and materials necessary to complete the installation as shown on the Drawings and specified under this Section.
Measurement for waterman will be made along centreline of man, through valves and fittings, with no deduction for length of valves or fittings, over surface after work has been completed.
128  The contract contains supplementary conditions that the parties agree take precedence. They contain a similar clause, also numbered clause 1.8, and it provides as follows:
1.8 SUPPLY AND INSTALL 300 MM DIA. PVC DR35 RESERVOIR DRAIN PIPE IN COMMON TRENCH WITH 600 MM DIA. AND 300 MM DIA. WATER MAINS
.1 300 MM DIA. PVC35 pipe will be measured by lineal metres for installation in common trench with the 600/300 mm dia. water mains.
.2 Payment will include asphalt saw cutting where required, excavation, fittings and related materials, disposal to Contractor's disposal site, import or native backfill, surface restoration (excluding asphalt), cleaning all other work, materials and equipment necessary to complete the installation. Payment will be made at the Contract Unit Price specified in the Schedule of Quantities and Prices.
129  Under clause 1.3 of the supplementary specifications, payment for contract items shall be full compensation for labour, materials, etc. for which separate payment is not provided elsewhere in the contract. It is the application of the last part of clause 1.3 that is in issue - is payment for gravel in the trench to be made at the unit price provided for elsewhere in the contract?
130  The defendant's position is that its approval for payment was in accordance with the measurement and payment provisions of the contract. It says that the gravel that the plaintiff says ought to be included in the unit price for the watermain installation is in fact a separate pay item. It refers to clauses 1.14 and 1.15 of the supplementary specifications, which provide:
1.14 MoT - SELECT GRANULAR SUBBASE (SGSB) - VARIABLE THICKNESS FOR ROAD
.1 MoT select granular subbase (SGSB) will be to Ministry of Transportation specification. Measurement for SGSB of variable thickness will be measured for actual quantity placed in cubic metres. The volume for payment will be based on the length and average roadway width and depth.
.2 Payment will include supply of the select granular subbase material, placement, adjustment of moisture content, shaping and compaction. Payment will be made at the Contract Unit Price specified in the Schedule of Quantities and Prices.
1.15 MoT - 25 MM WELL GRADED BASE COARSE VARIABLE THICKNESS FOR ROAD
.1 MoT 25 MM well graded base coarse will be to Ministry of Transportation specifications. Measurement for well graded base course at variable thickness will be measured for actual quantity placed in cubic metres. The volume for payment will be based on the length and average roadway width and depth.
.2 Payment will include supply of 25mm well graded base coarse material, placement, adjustment of moisture content, shaping and compaction. Payment will be made at the Contract Unit Price specified in the Schedule of Quantities and Prices.
131  Although, as I noted, this is a matter of contractual interpretation rather than expert evidence, the position of the plaintiff expressed by Mr. Hunt is that the supply of trench gravel is incidental and according to the MMCD the unit cost payment includes everything but the asphalt. He explained that the gravel amount was 36% greater than specified and estimated in the contract. He noted however that with the Ministry contract in place, the estimated value for 25 mm crushed base gravel was <damage type = "other">$69,552.00</damage> and the total paid for 25 mm crushed base gravel was <damage type = "other">$152,010.00</damage>. The plaintiff asks me to infer that the significance of this evidence of the amount paid for gravel and the amount in the original estimate for gravel is that the overage is explained by the inappropriate approval for payment by the defendant.
132  The fundamental principles of contractual interpretation are well settled, and were reviewed by Madam Justice D. Smith in Grace Residences Ltd. v. Whitewater Concrete Ltd., :
[23] The principles of contractual interpretation were considered in Group Eight Investments Ltd. v. Taddei, , 57 B.C.L.R. (4th) 278 (C.A.) at paras. 20-21. They can be summarized as follows:
words must be given their plain and ordinary meaning unless to do so would result in an absurdity;
words must be interpreted in light of the whole of the contract and the intention of the parties expressed therein; and
the court assumes that the words in a contract are there for a purpose; it may reject an interpretation that would render one of the contract's terms ineffective.
[24] More recently in Chuddy v. Merchant Law Group, , , Mr. Justice Smith, in dissenting reasons, provided a helpful summary of the principles of contractual interpretation:
[207] The relevant principles of contractual interpretation are well-settled. The court must determine what the parties meant by the language they used in their written agreement, viewed objectively in the context of the circumstances in which the agreement was made. Evidence of the subjective intent of one or other party is inadmissible for that purpose. Where the language used is unambiguous, extrinsic evidence is not admissible to alter, vary, interpret, or contradict the words used in the contract. Resort to extrinsic evidence is normally permissible only when the document contains an ambiguity in the sense that "after considering the agreement itself, including the particular words used in their immediate context and in the context of the agreement as a whole, there remain two reasonable alternative interpretations". If there is such an ambiguity in the words used, the court should interpret them in a manner that accords with commercial reality and that avoids a commercial absurdity.
133  I have concluded that under the proper interpretation of the contract, gravel is an item that is part of the work to be done to install the pipe, which falls under surface restoration under clause 1.8 of the supplementary conditions (consistently with the definition under the MMCD), and that payment for gravel outside the trench is a separate pay item under 1.14 and 1.15.
134  Reading the contract as a whole I find that there is harmony in the plaintiff's interpretation that gravel in the trench is part of imported backfill and provisions for payment under clauses 1.14 and 1.15 are for gravel that is not part of the trench. In my determination, that gives meaning to all of the provisions of the contract, there is no ambiguity and does not interpret the provisions in isolation. I agree with the plaintiff's interpretation that payment for gravel in the trench including surface restoration is to be paid to the contractor as part of the unit price for pipe while gravel outside the trench can be an additional pay item.
135  I find that the evidence supports the position of the plaintiff that the approval of the defendant for payment of gravel in the trench, which should have been part of the unit price for pipe installation, amounted to negligent administration of the construction contract. I do not see it suggested that the original estimate of gravel was faulty. Allowing for allowing for some variation from the original estimate, recognizing that the plaintiff has the burden of proof and doing the best I can on the evidence at trial, I award damages under this claim of <damage type = "sub-special">$60,000.00</damage>.
Conclusion
136  I find that the plaintiff has proven that the defendant was negligent and breached the contract between the parties and has proven damages.
137  With respect to the 4 claims advanced I find that the plaintiff has proven damages as follows:
 Claim 1: <damage type = "sub-total">$10,000.00</damage> 
 Claim 2: <damage type = "sub-total">$80,000.00</damage> 
 Claim 3: <damage type = "sub-total">$0.00</damage> 
 Claim 4: <damage type = "sub-total">$60,000.00</damage> 
138  The plaintiff is also entitled to costs.
139  I was told there were some ancillary matters the plaintiff wished to make submissions about if it was successful. If the parties are not able to agree on matters such as interest, they are entitled to make further submissions in that respect by arranging a time through the registry to appear before me.
J.S. SIGURDSON J.
End of Document
Kerr (Litigation Guardian of) v. Creighton, [2007] B.C.J. No. 309
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
Shaw J.
Heard: January 16 - 19, 2007.
Judgment: February 15, 2007.
Vancouver Registry No. M043486
[2007] B.C.J. No. 309   |      |
Between Trey Kerr, an infant by his litigation guardian Neal Uchida, Plaintiff, and Paul Andrew Creighton, Defendant, and Sean Kerr and Cecelia Kerr, Third Parties
(60 paras.)
Case Summary
Tort law — Negligence — Contributory negligence — Apportionment of liability — Motor vehicles — Liability of driver — The defendant driver was found to be negligent for failing to keep an adequate lookout, and he was 85 per cent responsible for the accident, while the 11-year-old plaintiff was 15 per cent responsible for failing to dismount his bike before crossing in the crosswalk.
The 11-year-old plaintiff was injured when he was struck by the motor vehicle driven by the defendant while the plaintiff was riding his bike -- The trial was severed, and only the issue of liability was to be determined -- The plaintiff had suffered a head injury and did not remember the accident, while the defendant did not see the plaintiff crossing the street, and there were no witnesses -- HELD: The defendant was 85 per cent responsible for the accident, and the plaintiff 15 per cent -- The defendant was negligent and he caused or contributed to the accident -- However, the plaintiff was contributorily negligent by crossing the cross-walk on his bicycle rather than on foot -- The defendant's testimony lacked credibility; it was largely self-serving reconstruction rather than accurate memory -- His explanation made no sense, and the court inferred that the defendant was not keeping an adequate lookout as he approached and went through the intersection -- The plaintiff was crossing the road in the crosswalk -- Even assuming that the plaintiff venturing into the crosswalk was a surprise occurrence vis-Ó-vis the defendant, the defendant had more than enough time to perceive the danger and brake sufficiently to avoid the plaintiff.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Motor Vehicle Act, (2)(b)
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: Michael D. Murphy, Anna Sekunova
Counsel for the Defendant: C. Peter Collins
Counsel for the Third Parties: Perry A. Mazzone
SHAW J.
1   On April 11, 2004, the plaintiff, Trey Kerr, then age 11, was injured when he was struck by a motor vehicle driven and owned by the defendant, Paul Andrew Creighton. The accident occurred at the intersection of Mount Seymour Road and the entrance to the Parkgate Shopping Centre in North Vancouver. The plaintiff was riding his bicycle across Mount Seymour Road when he was struck by the defendant's vehicle.
2  The plaintiff claims damages against the defendant for injuries he suffered in the accident. This judgment is on the question of liability only. The subject of damages has been severed from liability and will be heard at a later date, if necessary.
3  In addition to the plaintiff's claim against the defendant, there are third party proceedings by the defendant against the plaintiff's parents. The defendant claims indemnity from the plaintiff's parents for any damages he may have to pay to the plaintiff, alleging that they failed to properly teach their son the rules of the road and failed to properly supervise him.
4  During the course of the trial, I dismissed the third party proceedings on a no-evidence motion. At the request of counsel, costs were left to be spoken to after the judgment on liability was rendered.
The Evidence and Findings of Fact
5  There is very little solid evidence to assist me in determining the facts. The plaintiff suffered a head injury and has no memory of the accident and what led up to it. The defendant says that he saw the plaintiff riding his bicycle on Mount Seymour Road, but did not see him crossing the street. No witness actually saw the collision.
6  I will need to draw inferences based upon such evidence as I accept. Those inferences will be on the balance of probabilities, and at times that balance will be narrow. That is the nature of this case.
7  In the vicinity of the Parkgate intersection, there are two northbound and two southbound traffic lanes. There is also a northbound left turn lane for access to the Parkgate shopping centre. To the right hand side of the northbound traffic lanes is a marked bicycle lane. On the north side of the intersection, there is a marked crosswalk traversing Mount Seymour Road.
8  The defendant, who was then age 21, was proceeding north on Mount Seymour Road in his Honda motor vehicle. He was in the left-hand lane of the two northbound traffic lanes. His speed was at or about the speed limit of 50 kilometres per hour ("kph"). As he was approaching or in the intersection, he took his foot off the accelerator and started slowing down. His speed was probably less than 45 kph when the collision occurred.
9  The plaintiff was also proceeding north on Mount Seymour Road. He was in the bicycle lane on the right hand side of the road. He was wearing his safety helmet. He planned to go to the Safeway store at the Parkgate Shopping Centre to buy some things his mother needed for the preparation of a special lunch, it being Easter Sunday that day. To get to the shopping mall, the plaintiff turned left to cross Mount Seymour Road. It was as he was crossing that the collision occurred.
10  The plaintiff was struck by the right front of the defendant's vehicle and propelled over the car's hood where he collided with the windshield. There were no skid marks. The police who attended at the scene marked the position of the vehicle and the plaintiff's body where they had come to rest immediately after the collision. These markings were north of the crosswalk. They also photographed the bicycle.
11  Just prior to the accident, a Mr. George Lache was riding his bicycle southbound on Mount Seymour Road toward the intersection. He testified that when he was about 150 to 250 yards from the intersection, he saw a cyclist riding his bicycle towards him in the same bicycle lane that he was in. He said he saw the cyclist turn to the left and start to cross Mount Seymour Road. At this point Mr. Lache looked elsewhere and did not see the collision, but he did hear a thud. When he arrived at the scene, he saw the cyclist - the plaintiff - lying on the roadway.
12  Another witness, Ms. Monika Newmann, arrived at the scene on foot just after the accident. She testified that she spoke with the defendant and he told her that he had not seen the cyclist he had struck. Ms. Newmann said the defendant appeared to be distraught. I accept Ms. Newmann's evidence as to what the defendant told her and as to his appearance. However, for reasons stated below, I do not think that the defendant told her the whole truth.
13  The plaintiff's family lived in the immediate area and were familiar with the intersection and the crosswalk. The plaintiff's mother testified that she taught the plaintiff to cross at the crosswalk, dismount from his bicycle, look both ways for traffic and proceed on foot. She said that she and her son often used the crosswalk together and that he always dismounted and crossed in the crosswalk when he was with her. The plaintiff's father described his son as reliable, cautious and not a risk taker. I found both the parents to be credible witnesses.
14  The plaintiff testified. He said that he had no memory of the accident. He testified that he always used the crosswalk to cross Mount Seymour Road, that he always looked both ways and would ride his bicycle as he crossed the street. I found him to be a straightforward, credible witness.
15  Another witness was Jonathan Buffone, a young friend of the plaintiff. He testified that he and the plaintiff regularly crossed the intersection together with their bicycles, and that they would dismount, look both ways, and proceed on foot in the crosswalk. While I also found him to be credible, I think he was mistaken about the dismounting and proceeding on foot aspect of his evidence.
16  A question was raised as to the admissibility of the evidence of the plaintiff's regular use of the crosswalk, and as to what weight such evidence should be given if it was held to be admissible. I find that the evidence is admissible as evidence of the plaintiff's habit to cross that intersection in the crosswalk. This is circumstantial evidence and the court may accord it such weight as appears appropriate in the circumstances. See Belnap v. Meakes  (B.C.C.A.), R. v. Watson ,  (C.A.), Sawchuk v. ICBC , . I will deal with weight later in these reasons for judgment.
17  The defendant gave testimony. He said that he saw the plaintiff at some point riding his bicycle in the bicycle lane on Mount Seymour Road, but did not see him as he was crossing Mount Seymour Road. He said that he immediately "slammed" on his brakes when he realized that his windshield had been struck. He explained that his attention was focussed on the next intersection, at Banff Court, a block further along Mount Seymour Road, where he intended to turn left. He said that he was slowing down as he was going through the intersection, with his foot off the accelerator, and his speed was reduced to 45 kph or less.
18  Having observed the defendant during his testimony and considered the details of his evidence, particularly on cross-examination, I find that much of his testimony lacks credibility. In my view, it was largely self-serving reconstruction rather than accurate memory. Several examples bear out this conclusion. He gave varying and conflicting evidence of where he was and where the plaintiff was when he saw the plaintiff riding his bicycle. His explanation for failing to see the plaintiff crossing the street, that he was focussing his attention on the Banff Court intersection, makes little sense. That intersection was a block away. He demonstrated in court how far he turned his head to the left (about 10 to 15 degrees) to view the Banff Court intersection, when, patently, if he really was looking toward the Banff Court intersection a block away, no appreciable turn of the head would have been necessary.
19  He told the police that the Banff Court intersection was about 30 to 40 feet (about 9 to 12 meters) ahead of the Parkgate intersection, an assertion that was obviously incorrect, particularly given that he was very familiar with the area.
20  He described the plaintiff riding his bicycle in such great detail that his description appeared to me to be substantially reconstruction. He said the plaintiff was a "kid" (meaning a child), that he was wearing a safety helmet, that his bicycle was wobbling slightly, but not out of control, that the plaintiff was looking straight ahead, that he did not display a hand signal, that he was pedalling fast, but not excessively so, and that he was sitting "low" on his bicycle. All this detail was from a man who said he never saw the cyclist crossing the road, and therefore could only have seen the plaintiff from behind.
21  I do not accept the defendant's explanation for why he says he never saw the plaintiff crossing the street. I can only speculate what the cause was for the defendant failing to see what was there to be seen. But I can and do conclude that the explanation he offered, that he was focussing on the Banff Court intersection, makes little sense and is not true.
22  In these circumstances, I must resort to fair inference. I infer that the defendant was not keeping an adequate lookout as he approached and went through the Parkgate intersection.
23  On a balance of probabilities, I find that the plaintiff was crossing the road in the crosswalk. In making this finding, I give some weight to the evidence of the plaintiff's habit of always using the crosswalk. This aspect of his testimony is supported by the evidence of his mother and the evidence of Jonathan Buffone. The weight is partially reduced by the conflicting evidence of his mother and Mr. Buffone that the plaintiff ordinarily walked in the crosswalk, but the evidence that he habitually used the crosswalk is not contradicted.
24  The finding that the plaintiff was in the crosswalk is supported by a written statement given by the defendant on May 4, 2004, about three weeks after the accident. In the statement, the defendant described where he was when the collision took place; he used the expressions, "As I got up to that crosswalk" and "I would have been very close to the pedestrian crosswalk at this point".
25  Mr. Lache, the cyclist who saw the plaintiff from a distance of about 150 to 250 yards away, testified that the plaintiff took a diagonal route across Mount Seymour Road. I do not accept that evidence because, from that distance, it is unlikely the witness could tell with any degree of accuracy that the plaintiff's route was diagonal. Some indication of the difficulty of making accurate observations from 150 to 250 yards is provided by the witness testifying that the plaintiff was crossing the road to the north of the crosswalk. Given the evidence of the resting place of the car and the body, I find that the plaintiff could not have been crossing north of the crosswalk. Indeed, both counsel in their submissions conceded that the point of impact was not north of the crosswalk.
26  On a balance of probabilities, I find that the defendant caught a glimpse of the plaintiff, at least in his peripheral vision, prior to his vehicle reaching the crosswalk. The day was sunny and clear and there were no obstructions to vision. Given the relatively short distance that the vehicle and the plaintiff came to rest beyond the crosswalk and given my finding that the plaintiff was in the crosswalk when he was hit, the defendant must have been short of the crosswalk when he caught sight of the plaintiff; otherwise he could not have reacted and then brought the car to a halt as close to the crosswalk as he did.
27  I will now deal with the defendant's speed. I accept that he was slowing down, probably to under 45 kph, as he was proceeding through the intersection. Had that not been so, I think the plaintiff would probably have been killed and his bicycle damaged to a much greater extent than indicated by photographs taken by the police.
28  I turn to the plaintiff's speed as he was proceeding in the crosswalk. An accident reconstruction expert called by the defendant opined that the plaintiff's speed was 13.8 + 3.7 kph. The expert based his estimate upon a study showing that 11 year old cyclists ride at an average speed of 13.8 + 3.7 kph. The estimate was not based upon a study of cyclists crossing intersections in crosswalks. I do not accept the defence expert's estimate. In my opinion, statistics for average speeds of 11 year old cyclists shed no light on the average speed of cyclists of any age riding across streets in crosswalks.
29  An accident reconstruction expert called by the plaintiff opined that the plaintiff's speed at impact was likely in the range of 7 to 12 kph. He based this estimate upon the angle between the position of the damage to the front right portion of the defendant's vehicle and the position of the damage to the right side of the windshield.
30  While the calculation of speed by the plaintiff's expert provides only a rough estimate, I find that it is preferable to the statistical evidence of the speed of 11 year old cyclists provided by the defence expert.
31  The plaintiff's expert calculated the range of 7 to 12 kph for the bicycle's speed based upon the speed range of the car, which he assumed was between 45 and 55 kph. The expert said:
The ratio of the lateral to longitudinal displacement would be comparable to the speed ratio of the vehicle and cyclist. Based on these distances the cyclist speed would be about 17 to 22% of the vehicle speed. If the vehicle speed was between 44 and 55 km/h the cyclists speed would be between 7 to 12 km/h.
32  Based upon my finding that the defendant's speed had slowed to less than 45 kph, I choose the lower end of the 7 to 12 kph range and find that the bicycle's speed was approximately 7 kph. I note that this speed is close to a brisk walking pace, which is about 5 kph.
33  Was there sufficient time for the defendant to perceive that the plaintiff was crossing in the crosswalk and brake his car sufficiently to avoid striking him?
34  The defence expert opined that the defendant did not have enough time to perceive the danger and brake sufficiently to avoid the accident. I do not accept his opinion, which was based upon the use of 13.8 kph as the bicycle's speed; the slower speed of 7 kph almost doubles the time available to perceive the plaintiff and to brake.
35  The plaintiff's expert opined that the defendant had sufficient time to perceive the plaintiff starting across the road and then brake without striking him. This opinion was based upon the plaintiff's crossing speed being 10 kph (an average of the 7 to 12 kph estimate).
36  The finding of fact that the bicycle's speed was approximately 7 kph is critical to the determination of the issue of time for avoidance; the slower the bicycle speed, the greater the time available to detect the danger and avoid it.
37  It probably took the plaintiff over 3 seconds to proceed from the bicycle lane to the point of impact. The distance from the middle of the bicycle lane to the point of impact is about 6 meters. The speed of 7 kph is equivalent to 1.94 meters per second.
38  Assuming that close to 3 seconds would have been available to the defendant to perceive that the plaintiff was crossing the street and to apply his brakes, would the defendant have been able to avoid the collision had he been keeping a proper lookout? The answer is yes. Both the experts opined that 1.1 seconds or less would be the probable time for perception of the danger up to the point of engaging the brakes. The plaintiff's expert said:
A study by Olson reported that in daylight conditions a 50th percentile perception reaction time for a driver surprised by a hazard is 1.1 seconds, for an alerted driver this time would reduce to approximately 0.7 seconds.
39  The defendant's expert said:
As described in Section 4.5, 1.1 seconds is typically necessary to apply the brakes after hazard detection. The required time may be shorter in this case as detection and identification need not be carried out in a typical manner.
40  Once the brakes were applied, the stopping time would have been about 0.6 seconds. The total of 1.1 and 0.6 seconds is under 2 seconds. Thus, even assuming that the plaintiff venturing into the crosswalk was a surprise occurrence vis-à-vis the defendant, the defendant had more than enough time to perceive the danger and brake sufficiently to avoid the plaintiff.Liability of the Defendant
41  In addressing the question of negligence, I do so on the assumption that the defendant had the statutory right-of-way. The defendant was on a through street and the plaintiff was mounted on his bicycle while crossing in the crosswalk.
42  Because the plaintiff was riding his bicycle, he cannot claim the right-of-way that the law accords to pedestrians in crosswalks. Section 183(2)(b) of the Motor Vehicle Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 318 expressly forbids a cyclist riding in a crosswalk unless a bylaw or a sign authorizes doing so. See: Niitamo v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia  (S.C.), Ballance J. at paras. 18 and 19.
43  In the present case, there is no bylaw or sign which authorized bicyclists to ride in the crosswalk.
44  In considering the defendant's conduct, I have kept in mind the principles set out in Walker v. Brownlee,  (S.C.C.) per Cartwright J. at 461:
While the decision of every motor vehicle collision case must depend on its particular facts, I am of opinion that when A, the driver in the servient position, proceeds through an intersection in complete disregard of his statutory duty to yield the right-of-way, and a collision results, if he seeks to cast any portion of the blame upon B, the driver having the right-of-way, A must establish that after B became aware, or by the exercise of reasonable care should have become aware, of A's disregard of the law B had in fact a sufficient opportunity to avoid the accident of which a reasonably careful and skillful driver would have availed himself; and I do not think that in such circumstances any doubts should be resolved in favour of A, whose unlawful conduct was fons et origo mali.
45  On the facts as I have found them, I have no doubt that the defendant was negligent and that his negligence caused or contributed to the accident. His negligence was inadequate lookout. He failed to see the plaintiff when it was apparent that he was crossing the road. When he did catch a glimpse of the plaintiff, it was then too late to avoid colliding with him. Had the defendant been keeping an adequate lookout, he would have had sufficient time to perceive the danger and brake sufficiently to avoid the accident.
Contributory Negligence by the Plaintiff
46  I must consider the question of contributory negligence by asking whether the plaintiff exercised the care to be expected from a child of like age, intelligence and experience.
47  In Scarff (Next Friend Of) v. Wilson,  (C.A.), Macfarlane J.A. for the court said at para. 10:
In considering whether the child should be found guilty of contributory negligence, the trial judge applied the test stated in McEllistrum v. Etches :
Where the age is not such as to make a discussion of contributory negligence absurd, it is a question for the jury in each case whether the infant exercised the care to be expected from a child of like age, intelligence and experience.
48  The plaintiff was then 11 years old, a fairly experienced bicycle rider, and of normal intelligence.
49  The defendant contends that the plaintiff's lookout was faulty. The defendant further submits that the plaintiff was at fault in crossing the street mounted on his bicycle.
50  I will deal first with the question of lookout. Did the plaintiff see the defendant's car approaching? If he did, did he react appropriately? These two questions are interconnected.
51  I infer, on a balance of probabilities, that the plaintiff saw the defendant's vehicle coming toward him. The plaintiff was experienced in crossing at this intersection. His habit was to look both ways. He would have been used to seeing vehicles slow down and stop for him and other users of the crosswalk. In this case, the defendant's vehicle was slowing down. I think it likely that the plaintiff saw this and was misled into thinking that the vehicle was going to continue to slow down and stop. The other apparent explanation for what happened is that the plaintiff was not keeping a lookout and simply rode - in effect blindly - in front of the defendant's car. On a balance of probabilities, I prefer the explanation that the plaintiff saw the defendant's vehicle slowing down and did not appreciate that the car was not going to stop until it was too late.
52  While an adult would probably have been less likely to be drawn into a false sense of security in these circumstances than an 11 year old child, it is through the child's eyes that I must judge this case. With this in mind, I am not prepared to find that the plaintiff was at fault in failing to recognize until it was too late that the defendant's car was not going to stop for him.
53  I turn to the submission that the plaintiff was negligent by crossing the street mounted on his bicycle. By riding his bicycle rather than walking, was the plaintiff negligent, and if so, did his negligence contribute to the accident?
54  The plaintiff was well-taught that he should dismount and proceed on foot in the crosswalk. He was intelligent and experienced enough to know that this was the way he should cross the street. I find that he was negligent in proceeding mounted on his bicycle rather than on foot. I also find that this negligence probably contributed to the accident. It did so in the sense that his ability to avoid the oncoming car was compromised by the fact that he was on the bicycle rather than on foot.
55  Accordingly, I find that the plaintiff was contributorily negligent by crossing the street on his bicycle rather than on foot.
Apportionment of Liability
56  I place considerable weight on the defendant's inadequate lookout. His lookout was so deficient that on a clear day he failed to see what was there to be seen, that is, the plaintiff crossing the roadway in the crosswalk, until it was too late to avoid him.
57  The plaintiff's negligence was being mounted on his bicycle rather than crossing the street on foot. While he did not have the right-of-way because he was not on foot, he nonetheless did use the crosswalk. He crossed at little more than a brisk walking speed and, on seeing the defendant's vehicle slowing down, was lulled into thinking that he could proceed safely in front of the car - until it was too late to avoid being hit.
58  I set the degrees of negligence at 85 percent against the defendant and 15 percent against the plaintiff.
Summary
59  In summary, I find both the plaintiff and the defendant at fault for the accident of April 11, 2004 and assess the degrees of fault at 85 percent against the defendant and 15 percent against the plaintiff.
60  Costs may be spoken to, if necessary.
SHAW J.
End of Document
Rosso v. Balubal, [2014] B.C.J. No. 2385
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Colombia
S.A. Griffin J.
Heard: June 2-6 and 9-11, 2014.
Judgment: September 24, 2014.
Docket: M122236
Registry: Vancouver
[2014] B.C.J. No. 2385   |   2014 BCSC 1786
Between Ryan Keith Rosso, Plaintiff, and Mirriam David Balubal and Richard Glen Kraus, Defendants
(163 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Body injuries — Back and spine — Neck — Head injuries — Headaches — Psychological injuries — Emotional and mental distress — Considerations impacting on award — Degree of impairment — Permanent total or partial disability — Temporary total or partial disability — Credibility — Action by Rosso for motor vehicle damages allowed in part — Accident caused temporary headaches and anxiety and ongoing mild back and neck pain, but Rosso's account of variety of other disabilities unreliable — Given unmotivated employment history and no realistic possibility of earning income as musician, Rosso awarded $23,000 for lost income earning capacity and past lost income of nine months' salary at former employer — Rosso also awarded $10,000 cost of future care, $1,000 in special damages for therapy and $20,000 non-pecuniary damages for pain and suffering and lost quality of life.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Calculation — Contingencies — Considerations — Duration of loss — Extent of incapacity — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Special damages — Past loss of income — Expenses and expenditures — Therapy or rehabilitation — Non-pecuniary loss — Pain and suffering — Action by Rosso for motor vehicle damages allowed in part — Accident caused temporary headaches and anxiety and ongoing mild back and neck pain, but Rosso's account of variety of other disabilities unreliable — Given unmotivated employment history and no realistic possibility of earning income as musician, Rosso awarded $23,000 for lost income earning capacity and past lost income of nine months' salary at former employer — Rosso also awarded $10,000 cost of future care, $1,000 in special damages for therapy and $20,000 non-pecuniary damages for pain and suffering and lost quality of life.
Tort law — Negligence — Causation — Causal connection — Action by Rosso for motor vehicle damages allowed in part — Accident caused temporary headaches and anxiety and ongoing mild back and neck pain, but Rosso's account of variety of other disabilities unreliable — Given unmotivated employment history and no realistic possibility of earning income as musician, Rosso awarded <damage type = "future wage loss">$23,000</damage> for lost income earning capacity and past lost income of nine months' salary at former employer — Rosso also awarded <damage type = "future care">$10,000</damage> cost of future care, <damage type = "special">$1,000</damage> in special damages for therapy and <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$20,000</damage> non-pecuniary damages for pain and suffering and lost quality of life.
Action by Rosso for damages from a motor vehicle accident. The defendant acknowledged that he caused the accident, but contested whether the accident caused the various injuries and disabilities which Rosso alleged as well as the quantum of the claimed damages. Prior to the accident, Rosso had a history of working in entry level and low-skilled jobs while focusing on his music career. He argued that the injuries which were caused by the accident resulted in lost income earning capacity with respect to his music career specifically and his employability generally. 

HELD: The action was allowed in part.
 Rosso's view of his disabilities was unreliable. Other than temporary headaches and anxiety, and ongoing mild neck and back pain which could be addressed through exercise, Rosso failed to establish that the other alleged disabilities existed or were caused by the accident. Rosso also failed to establish that there was a realistic possibility that his musical career would have become profitable if the accident did not occur. Given his past history of unmotivated non-musical employment, and the relatively minor nature of the ongoing injuries which did cause some limitation of the type of jobs he could perform, Rosso was awarded <damage type = "future wage loss">$23,000</damage> in lost future income earning capacity. He was also awarded past lost income equivalent to nine months' salary at his former employer, <damage type = "future care">$10,000</damage> for the cost of future care to attend yoga classes and <damage type = "special">$1,000</damage> in special damages for therapy costs. Rosso's non-pecuniary damage claim for pain and suffering and lost quality of life was valued at <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$20,000</damage>.
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: Stephen C.M. Yung.
Counsel for the Defendants: Ryan W. Morasiewicz.
Reasons for Judgment
S.A. GRIFFIN J.
Introduction
1  At age 31, on February 28, 2011, Ryan Rosso was driving a small delivery car in Vancouver, as part of his employment, when another driver heading in the same direction in the lane to his left, Mirriam Balubal, changed lanes and drove into the driver's side of his car.
2  It is admitted that Ms. Balubal was negligent and caused the accident.
3  The larger question in this case is the extent to which the accident caused Mr. Rosso to suffer injuries for which he should be compensated in damages. In this regard, Mr. Rosso claims damages in all of the categories normally addressed in cases involving personal injury: loss of future earning capacity; past income loss; cost of future care; special damages; and non-pecuniary damages.
4  There are two key issues related to causation.
5  One issue is the extent to which all symptoms described by Mr. Rosso can be attributed to the accident. There is no question he suffered some soft tissue injuries but he has reported a broad constellation of symptoms ranging from blurry vision to tingling and loss of function in his arms and hands, which no medical test has been able to explain.
6  A second causation issue is the extent to which Mr. Rosso's injuries have caused him to suffer a loss of income and future loss of earning capacity. He advances a claim on the basis that he is permanently disabled from work. He has not sought out employment and has not fully resumed other activities of daily life since the accident. The question is whether this is caused by the accident, or is it other life circumstances that have flattened him, including the death of his best friend in August 2012 and his lack of success in his music career?
Plaintiff's Pre-Accident History
7  Because there is so little medical evidence to support the full constellation of Mr. Rosso's complaints, the plaintiff relies heavily on the temporal connection between the accident and Mr. Rosso's reported symptoms.
8  It is therefore very important to look carefully at the evidence of Mr. Rosso's life circumstances before the accident to compare his situation to what it was after the accident.
9  As a ten-year-old child, Mr. Rosso was a passenger in his aunt's car when another vehicle struck them. Mr. Rosso could remember getting into the car but not the accident itself. There were no medical records produced from that time, but the evidence of Mr. Rosso and his parents supports the conclusion that it was a serious accident and he suffered serious injuries, including damage to his liver and spleen. Mr. Rosso may have lost consciousness in the accident, and his mother remembers that he was talking gibberish when she saw him in the hospital. He was hospitalized for approximately two weeks and kept home from school for approximately one month.
10  The testimony of Mr. Rosso and his parents indicates that they all believed he recovered fully from that childhood accident.
11  Mr. Rosso grew up in Calgary, Alberta. He started playing the guitar at age 12. He bought his first guitar from the income he earned on a paper route. A few years later, he worked at another part-time job and with his earnings bought a better guitar. According to his mother, he was largely self-taught and he learned to play the guitar very well.
12  Mr. Rosso is a likeable young man with an artist's temperament. From an early age, his only ambition has been to make music by playing his guitar.
13  Academics were not his strength or interest in high school and he needed an extra year in order to graduate.
14  After Mr. Rosso graduated from high school in 1998, he had no particular career goal outside of his music, and so went from one "day job" to another as a means to the end of paying for his music ambitions and his living expenses. He was not pursuing any line of paid employment with the goal of advancing in a non-musical career.
15  Mr. Rosso formed a rock band with a friend and other people he met through posting ads. The band had four members, including the plaintiff. They called themselves "Blue Child", wrote and performed their own music, and played some local venues like bars and clubs.
16  In 2004, Mr. Rosso and the other members of Blue Child decided to move to Vancouver in the hopes of pursuing better opportunities for the band. The band consisted of four members, including Mr. Rosso on guitar, a bass player, a drummer (Eric Lowerison) and a singer (Curtis Van Woerkom).
17  As Blue Child the band performed at various clubs and bars and other venues in Vancouver.
18  The band was not making enough money to provide any income to the members who worked at their various day jobs. The band's modest earnings, when they were paid in money instead of beer, were put towards paying for rental of the band's practice space, recording a CD, and some other promotional costs.
19  In 2009, the band's bass player left the band. A new bass player joined the band, Eric Balana, who also had other talents such as playing the keyboard. The band decided to start fresh under a new name, "the may cause".
20  For approximately a year, the band practiced playing together and worked at writing new songs. By approximately January 2010, the band started to perform occasionally.
21  As before, the band's performances did not generate sufficient revenue to do more than pay for some of the band's expenses.
22  The band members' dreams were to someday tour together across Canada and to become commercially successful. By January 2011, they were feeling good about their future as a band but I find that the band had not reached any significant turning point before Mr. Rosso had his accident in February.
23  There was no attempt to prove at trial that the band's dreams were achievable. I find it very significant that no evidence was called from any independent witness to speak to the band's talent and commercial prospects, such as a music promoter or booking agent or even the owner or manager of a local venue where the band performed.
24  Mr. Rosso's employment earnings history prior to the accident in 2011 was as follows:
in 2010, he earned <damage type = "other">$22,782</damage> as a delivery driver for an auto parts company;
in 2009, he earned <damage type = "other">$7,117</damage> when he worked three months as a delivery driver for a company making dental implants;
in 2008, he earned <damage type = "other">$18,769</damage> as a car washer and auto detailer for a car company;
in 2007, he earned <damage type = "other">$10,495</damage> in a year in which he also attended school;
in 2006, he earned <damage type = "other">$1,590</damage> from handing out a free newspaper while going to school; and,
in 2005, he earned <damage type = "other">$12,672</damage> as a landscaper.
25  The two references to going to school in 2006 and 2007, above, refer to a course that Mr. Rosso took at the Pacific Audio Visual Institute in Vancouver. This was a one-year course to obtain certification as an audio engineer. Mr. Rosso took the course only as a matter of personal interest to assist him with respect to his band's future recordings, not because he wished to obtain employment in this field. He achieved a grade of only 65%, which was not sufficient to obtain his certificate. He also did not pursue finding an unpaid internship, which was part of the program.
26  The job in 2008 involved cleaning cars at a car dealership. Mr. Rosso hurt his back on the job and was involved in a WorkSafe BC claim in relation to that injury. His evidence was that his back healed but he was subsequently laid off from that job.
27  At the time of the accident which is the subject of this proceeding, Mr. Rosso was employed as a delivery driver for a company that made auto parts. His employment started in August 2009 and he was working there for approximately one and a half years before his accident in February 2011. His starting pay was <damage type = "other">$10.20</damage> per hour but had increased to <damage type = "other">$11.40</damage> per hour.
28  It is fair to say that neither his employer at the auto parts company nor Mr. Rosso were enamoured of each other. At the time of the accident, Mr. Rosso had taken a few steps towards looking for other employment with no specific career goal in mind but nothing had come about. The evidence from his former manager was that the company had made an internal decision to terminate Mr. Rosso's employment but this had not yet been communicated to Mr. Rosso. The plaintiff accepts that the weight of the evidence is such that his employment with this employer was destined to end very soon, regardless of the accident.
The Circumstances of the Accident
29  The accident occurred on February 28, 2011. The plaintiff was driving the company car he used to deliver auto parts, a Pontiac Wave, in the curb lane on a busy street in Vancouver, East 2nd Avenue, heading east. The defendant Ms. Balubal was driving a Rav4 vehicle on East 2nd Avenue, also heading east. She was driving in a lane parallel and to the left of the lane in which Mr. Rosso was travelling. She decided to turn right, and did not see Mr. Rosso's vehicle, which she believes was in her blind spot. She thus turned her vehicle right and bumped into the driver's side of Mr. Rosso's car.
30  Both vehicles then pulled over, and the drivers exchanged information. Mr. Rosso's car would not start up again, and so a tow truck was called for his car. After exchanging information, Ms. Balubal was able to drive her vehicle away.
31  The impact of the collision was not significant enough to cause Ms. Balubal's passenger, her husband, the car owner and co-defendant, to lose his grip on a medium-sized dog sitting in his lap.
32  The impact left scrape marks and some dents on the vehicles. The cost of repair was under <damage type = "other">$4,000</damage> for the defendant's vehicle and just over <damage type = "other">$4,000</damage> for the plaintiff's vehicle.
33  The plaintiff testified that the impact of the collision left him feeling sore and tense mostly in his shoulders and neck. He called a work superior, Melissa Gritzuk, who came to the scene. She testified that when she got there, the plaintiff told her he was feeling "alright". She also felt that he looked "alright" to her, so she left him at the scene to wait for the arrival of a tow truck, following which he came to the office and filled out paperwork in relation to the accident.
34  The plaintiff testified that being left at the accident scene to wait for the tow truck made him angry and frustrated. He said his adrenaline was running high. He said that when he got home that day, he was worried that he might have a concussion because he felt disoriented, and was scared that if he fell asleep he might not wake up.
35  The plaintiff was never diagnosed with a concussion, nor is there any suggestion that the plaintiff's head made impact with any part of the car during the collision.
Post-Accident
36  After moving to British Columbia, Mr. Rosso did not register for provincial medical coverage and did not have a family doctor in British Columbia.
37  Mr. Rosso first went to a clinic within a week of the accident. He testified that he saw a doctor who he told him to take Advil and to try to remain limber and move around as normal.
38  In the meantime, Mr. Rosso felt very sore and unable to return to work. He enlisted friends and family to help him with buying groceries and household chores such as preparing meals and doing laundry and cleaning. His mother came out from Calgary and stayed with him for a time, providing emotional support as well as doing household chores for him.
39  Eventually Mr. Rosso found a family doctor accepting new patients, and became a patient of Dr. Barber, first seeing him on March 22, 2011. Dr. Barber noted that Mr. Rosso had good range of motion in his neck but it was painful; he had good range of motion in his shoulders but this caused mid-low back pain; and he had good grip and arm strength. He diagnosed Mr. Rosso with a soft tissue injury to the neck and back.
40  Dr. Barber continued to see Mr. Rosso as a patient, and referred him to physiotherapy, massage and acupuncture.
41  What followed over the next couple of years were multiple visits to Dr. Barber where Mr. Rosso reported an increasing number of fluctuating symptoms, some of which he reported as getting worse. Dr. Barber referred him to a number of specialists.
42  Mr. Rosso was also experiencing some other difficulties in his life.
43  He had not returned to work at the auto parts company and felt under financial pressure. He received some disability payments from an insurer but these ended in May 2012 when the insurer demanded repayment on the basis that a WorkSafe BC claim should have covered the plaintiff.
44  In March 2012, Mr. Rosso's employer wrote to him taking the position that he had not been performing to expectations prior to his disability and terminated his employment on two weeks' pay in lieu of notice.
45  At the same time, Mr. Rosso's musical career was going nowhere. In the first few months after his accident, he felt that he could not play his guitar because of his injuries. He then tried to practice with the band but felt that he tired out after 30 minutes, instead of the usual four-hour practices. He felt that he could only play simpler songs, and that his arm and hand would get numb and would tingle from playing for any extended period or more difficult songs.
46  Eventually Mr. Rosso did play with his band at a few venues after the accident. However, he was not able to contribute in the same way with loading and unloading the musical gear. Also, his band played shorter sessions, approximately half an hour.
47  The defendant hired an investigator to surreptitiously videotape Mr. Rosso playing with his band at a venue in June 2012. The videotape confirmed that Mr. Rosso was often shaking out his hand and arm. Before the band was playing, he moved around and either paced or changed position from sitting or standing. The videotape showed sessions of the band playing for approximately half an hour, with Mr. Rosso on guitar, but no audio was recorded.
48  Tragically, in August 2012 the band's drummer, Eric Lowerison, was killed in an accident. He was a close childhood friend and like a brother to Mr. Rosso.
49  Mr. Rosso was devastated by the death and went through extended and extreme grieving.
50  After the death of Mr. Lowerison, the band discontinued altogether.
51  Throughout this time Mr. Rosso's reports of a broad range of symptoms resulted in Dr. Barber referring him to numerous other medical experts and for medical investigations to assess other conditions or potential causes of the symptoms, such as multiple sclerosis, or neurological damage. No other medical conditions or causes of the reported symptoms were found.
52  Mr. Rosso's reports to physicians were not always consistent with respect to these other symptoms, and he said they can vary by the hour and day, but over time they have multiplied and he has described them this way:
migraines/headaches, with nausea;
sleeplessness;
driving anxiety;
arm and leg stiffness;
arm and hand issues, including:
tingling;
complete loss of motor function in fingers, wrists and arms, when his fingers and arms do not respond and, or go limp;
reduced strength, from his fingers to his shoulders;
loss of finger dexterity;
pain, including sharp pain in wrists and hands;
strange sensations including hot and cold and pins and needles;
numbness in both hands and arms, with the numbness extending up his arm and encompassing his cheek and face;
shaky and weakness;
shots of electricity going down arms;
leg and foot issues, including:
numbness and tingling from his hips to his toes on both sides;
tightness (to the point of feeling like they would snap like a twig);
toes curling downwards;
numbness and tingling on his torso;
panic attacks;
pain "all over";
memory problems;
concentration problems;
bilateral shoulder pain;
dizziness;
TMJ and jaw pain and clicking;
skull numbness and buzzing and physically vibrating;
eye issues, including:
seeing shadows or black dots in his vision;
blurry vision;
ear issues, including:
pain;
ringing and tinnitus (both connected to the jaw popping and otherwise);
episodic choking and difficulty swallowing; and,
chest pain (described as muscular and heart pain).
53  The many medical experts who Mr. Rosso has seen have been unable to find any objective signs to support this broad range of symptoms, such as signs of muscle wasting or signs of nerve damage. There has been no diagnosis of fibromyalgia or concussion or panic disorder.
54  The plaintiff's mother now lives in Australia, and concerned about him, she invited him to visit. Mr. Rosso spent time with his mother in Australia from approximately November 2012 to February 2013. There he received emotional support, nutritious meals and engaged in almost daily yoga sessions.
55  When he returned to Canada, he felt much better.
56  Mr. Rosso now regularly attends yoga as a form of exercise and finds that it helps him feel better. He is still not working at any paid employment.
Injuries Caused by the Accident
57  The defendants submit that Mr. Rosso's injuries were short-term, and his evidence that he has ongoing pain in his neck and back should be rejected. In part, they say this is because the evidence regarding his other symptoms is not believable.
58  In summary, Mr. Rosso was investigated by x-rays of his neck and back; a CT scan; a MRI of his head; a bone scan and by nerve conduction studies. All results were normal and could not explain all of his reported symptoms. Physiatrists, neurologists and a psychiatrist saw him and none of their medical reports attributed the broader range of symptoms reported by Mr. Rosso to the accident.
59  The plaintiff said that one of his biggest complaints is feeling disoriented and having a foggy brain.
60  The plaintiff's counsel referred him to a psychiatrist, Dr. Roy O'Shaughnessy, for an independent psychiatric examination to determine if the plaintiff suffered any mental disorder as a result of the injuries sustained in the accident.
61  Dr. O'Shaughnessy saw the plaintiff on February 12, 2014 and produced a medical report on March 3, 2014. He diagnosed the Plaintiff with Persistent Depressive Disorder (formerly known as dysthymia). This is a condition involving chronic low-grade levels of depression and can be accompanied by low motivation, low energy, low drive and low effort.
62  Significantly, Dr. O'Shaughnessy was unable to provide the opinion that the plaintiff's mental condition was probably caused by the accident. This is because of a number of reasons that suggest other factors possibly caused this condition:
the plaintiff described his mood symptoms as not appearing until approximately one year post-accident;
the evidence does not suggest that the pain following the accident was severe enough to have triggered a clinical depression;
other factors were present in the plaintiff's life which could have played a role, including the death of his friend in August 2012, and his precarious financial situation;
it is possible he had a closed head injury when he was in an accident as a child, and this may be playing a role in his reported symptoms.
63  Dr. O'Shaughnessy felt that the plaintiff's mental condition may be contributing to the plaintiff taking longer to recover from the accident, as he has appeared unmotivated to exercise and to condition himself.
64  I note that if the plaintiff had this mental condition at the time of the accident, an argument might have been made that he is a "thin skull plaintiff". This argument is based on the logic that a tortfeasor takes his victim as he finds him and is responsible for all losses caused by the negligent act, including any flowing from a plaintiff's particular pre-existing vulnerability to his injuries: Athey v. Leonati,  at paras 32, 34.
65  However, the plaintiff did not advance the thin skull theory. This presumably is because the evidence does not support such an argument, as according to Dr. O'Shaughnessy (and the patient's own reports) the full symptoms associated with this mental condition did not show up until one year after the accident. The plaintiff claims that everything was fine with his health physically and mentally before the accident.
66  Dr. O'Shaughnessy noted that physical deconditioning may be contributing to the plaintiff's pain. This latter viewpoint was shared by other experts, including a rheumatologist, Dr. Avina-Zubieta, who saw the plaintiff and ruled out fibromyalgia as a cause of his problems.
67  The fact that the plaintiff felt better after a three-month period of practicing daily yoga in Australia from November 2012 to February 2013 does support the conclusion that part of his problem was deconditioning and that if he exercises regularly his pain levels will decrease.
68  The other symptom that the plaintiff complained causes him the most difficulty currently is the tingling and numbness in his left hand. Because this is the hand requiring the most dexterity when playing guitar, he finds he is limited to playing only approximately 30 minutes a day. He says at times his arm and hand do not work at all.
69  No written expert opinion was presented at trial which linked the plaintiff's arm and hand symptoms to the accident.
70  One of the plaintiff's expert witnesses, Dr. Giantomaso, a physiatrist, did say in his oral testimony that he felt that the plaintiff's arm symptoms were linked to the neck injury as a non-neurological myofascial referral. However, I have difficulty accepting this evidence as there was no focus on the plaintiff's arm complaints in Dr. Giantomaso's written report and he did not seem aware of the extent to which the plaintiff testified that he would suffer complete loss of function in his arms and hands.
71  Dr. Giantomaso's written opinion was that his diagnosis of the plaintiff was "chronic pain temporally and causally related to a February 28, 2011 motor vehicle collision including the following issues":
Diagnoses Likely Causally Related to the Motor Vehicle Collision of February 28, 2011:
Posttraumatic cervical sprain-strain injury consistent with a WAD-II injury. Chronic.
Thoracic sprain-strain injury grade 1-2. Chronic.
Lumbar sprain-strain injury grade 1-2. Chronic.
72  The reference to "WAD" is to "Whiplash Associated Disorder".
73  In reviewing the plaintiff's history, Dr. Giantomaso noted that Mr. Rosso told him that after the accident Mr. Rosso noticed tingling in the arms. This is consistent with Dr. Barber's medical records as well.
74  However, in terms of Mr. Rosso's present "functional history", the complaints noted by Dr. Giantomaso in his written report had to do with neck and back pain and there were no complaints noted with respect to the plaintiff's arms and hands, including in connection with playing the guitar.
75  Also, Dr. Giantomaso's physical examination of the plaintiff did not reproduce any of the arm or hand complaints.
76  Thus there was nothing said in Dr. Giantomaso's report regarding Mr. Rosso's arm complaints being caused by the accident.
77  Another possible explanation for the plaintiff's hand tingling is carpal tunnel syndrome, arising from his guitar playing, however, this has not been diagnosed.
78  Further, as noted, the plaintiff's evidence about his arm and hand symptoms went beyond tingling and numbness to complete loss of function. There is no physical explanation for this in any of the evidence. None of the medical tests found any decreased grip strength or other signs that might support a physical cause for this reported symptom.
79  As stated by Dr. O'Shaughnessy after reviewing the medical records, the plaintiff:
...has presented with a rather unusual number of symptoms and there has never been any clear physical basis found to support them. Specifically, Dr. Keyes did a thorough neurological examination to rule out any neuropathy or carpal tunnel syndrome. All investigations have been negative. In review of the physical findings by a number of doctors, there have never been any objective findings noted save for his complaints of pain and stiffness. I am assuming from my colleagues' opinions that basically there has not been any structural damage noted and that his symptoms are simply soft tissue injury in nature.
[Emphasis added.]
80  As already noted, Dr. O'Shaughnessy diagnosed the plaintiff with a psychological condition that is not shown to be caused by the accident.
81  A defence psychological expert, Dr. Koch, created a lengthy questionnaire of rare or implausible symptoms for Mr. Rosso. Mr. Rosso was asked to rate the frequency ("never" to "several times a day") and severity ("not at all" to "unbearable") of each of these problems. He said he experienced the following problems at levels that were either weekly, daily or several times a day:
loss of hearing;
eyes jerk from side to side;
dizziness from watching TV;
electrical pain in face;
eyelids droop involuntarily;
muscles in arms or legs twitch involuntarily;
feeling pins and needles all over his body;
fingers tremble very rapidly;
double vision;
suddenly and involuntarily falling asleep in the middle of the day;
body (arms, legs, torso, or head) jerk involuntarily;
problems reading;
problems swallowing;
arms/hands suddenly go limp.
82  On the same questionnaire, Mr. Rosso reported experiencing either monthly, or at least once in the past year, the following symptoms:
vertigo;
flickering lights or spots in his vision (but no halos of lights around objects);
dropping things;
feeling insects crawling on his skin;
uncomfortable pressure in his ears;
people tell him about something he said or did and he cannot remember it at all;
he cannot remember the names of family members or friends;
trouble buttoning his shirt or turning keys in locks;
sharp pain behind his eyes;
seeing "spiders" in his visual field;
falling for no reason;
warm intense pain radiating down his arms;
his lungs and/or eyes react strongly to odours;
slurring his words;
touching certain fibres makes his skin tingle;
bright light gives him headaches;
he speaks so softly others cannot hear him; and,
drooling unintentionally.
83  Mr. Rosso's answers to this questionnaire indicate that he is very suggestible when it comes to thinking he has something wrong with him. No physician was able to explain these symptoms as associated with Mr. Rosso's car accident.
84  Dr. Koch explained that he had some concerns about the validity of Mr. Rosso's self-reports. For example, Mr. Rosso reported some symptoms in a way similar to people who have a chronic pain disorder or panic disorder, but he did so in an atypical way. Other people with these disorders can identify when they last had a severe attack or what they think might trigger a severe attack or pain episode, whereas Mr. Rosso could not do so.
85  The plaintiff made some criticism of Dr. Koch's report. One criticism is that Dr. Koch said that he watched the surveillance video of Mr. Rosso, but that there were no overt pain behaviours on that video. The video was played in court, and some behaviours by Mr. Rosso were consistent with him having some discomfort, such as shaking out his hands, pacing, and fidgeting, although I must say these behaviours could also be consistent with someone who is nervous about playing before an audience.
86  Overall, I found Dr. Koch's analysis of the plaintiff quite helpful. He was unable to identify any specific health conditions on the part of the plaintiff.
87  The defendants also called opinion evidence from Dr. N. Reebye, a physiatrist who examined Mr. Rosso on January 23, 2014, reviewed the medical records and provided a report dated March 5, 214. His opinion was that the plaintiff suffered mild-to-moderate soft tissue injuries as a result of the accident, but no loss of function. I also found this opinion consistent with the force of the evidence.
Conclusion on Injuries Caused by the Accident
88  The medical evidence does not explain the long list of the plaintiff's reported health problems since the accident. While pain is subjective and cannot be measured on a test, the plaintiff's reported problems have extended well beyond pain.
89  The plaintiff has been through a battery of tests and no physician has found any physical problem explaining all of the diverse symptoms he reports. Several physicians suggest that the constellation of symptoms could indicate a neurological problem, but that has been ruled out.
90  Likewise, no physician has concluded that the plaintiff suffers from a psychological condition caused by the accident that would explain all of his symptoms.
91  The overall impression I formed of the plaintiff's evidence, after considering it in the context of the whole of the evidence and particularly the medical evidence, was that he tended to think very negatively and to have an exaggerated view of his physical limitations and symptoms following the accident.
92  I therefore unfortunately find that Mr. Rosso's perception of his abilities, or rather disabilities, is unreliable.
93  I agree with the defendants that there is no credible or reliable evidence to support a conclusion that the accident caused the broader range of symptoms reported by Mr. Rosso.
94  Despite this, I do accept the plaintiff's evidence that he has continued to experience some neck and back pain since the accident. There is abundant medical evidence which supports the conclusion that Mr. Rosso suffered some soft tissue injuries as a result of the accident and I so find. I accept the conclusion of the majority of the medical experts that if the pain has not gone away by now, it is likely he will continue to experience some ongoing pain in the future.
95  Physicians who have tested Mr. Rosso by palpation and range of motion exercises do not support a conclusion that the pain is more than mild to moderate. For example, Dr. Giantomaso stated in his report:
Palpatory pain was elicited with deep palpation at L4 and L5-S1 only. He had mild hypertonicity and mild pain to palpation in the lower cervical spine and thoracolumbar junction. ...range of motion was excellent in the cervical, thoracic and lumbar spine.
[Emphasis added.]
96  I am persuaded that the residual pain in Mr. Rosso's neck and back is relatively mild and that it can be managed with regular exercise.
97  The medical experts recommended that Mr. Rosso exercise and resume normal activities of life. Once he went to stay with his mother in Australia in late 2012 and began to exercise daily, he began to improve and cope better with his pain.
98  It seems likely that just before the accident occurred, Mr. Rosso was moderately dissatisfied with his life or at least not enthusiastic: he was in his thirties, employed at a low-skilled job he did not like and his music career was flat and despite years of trying, he had not made it as a commercially successful rock musician. When the accident occurred, he was not sufficiently motivated to find other interests and so it is likely that he focussed more and more on his pain and he began to perceive more and more limitations. Once his close friend and bandmate died in August 2012, his negativity increased and he had little energy or motivation to try to get better.
99  I am persuaded on the totality of the evidence that the motor vehicle accident caused the plaintiff to suffer ongoing symptoms of mild neck and back pain, which are symptoms likely to continue into the future to some extent but which can be managed with regular exercise. The evidence also supports the conclusion that immediately after the accident for a short period the plaintiff did have some associated minor headaches and anxiety in relation to driving which was caused by the accident.
100  I am not persuaded that the plaintiff suffered any other injuries as a result of the accident.
Damages
101  I turn now to consider the plaintiff's claims of damages.
Future Loss of Earning Capacity
102  The plaintiff claims he has been unable to work since the accident and is unemployable into the future.
103  The evidence does not support the conclusion that the injuries caused by the accident made the plaintiff unemployable.
104  The plaintiff's evidence is that he is uncomfortable staying in one position for a long period of time, whether standing or sitting. I have already concluded that the plaintiff's self-perception of his limitations is inflated and unreliable.
105  When John Lawless, a vocational consultant hired by his lawyer interviewed him, the plaintiff rejected the idea of vocational consulting. I am not satisfied that employment is closed to the plaintiff simply because he might need to shift around and change positions when working.
106  Dr. Giantomaso necessarily relied on Mr. Rosso's own reports as to how significant is his pain. But even relying on Mr. Rosso's self-reports, Dr. Giantomaso made this recommendation:
Ryan continues to experience significant pain with sitting. A vocational assessment and some direction in regards to future employability may be helpful. If he is able to get a sedentary position that does not require driving, a sit-stand workstation and time for frequent breaks would likely increase his chance for competitive employment and capacity and tolerance for full-time work.
107  Dr. Giantomaso did not suggest that Mr. Rosso was unemployable or even limited in his work in the future, but rather, recommended he have a vocational assessment. It is significant that Mr. Rosso has not done so.
108  Dr. Reebye's opinion was that there were "no physical contraindications" for the plaintiff to return to employment. Dr. Reebye felt that normalization of the plaintiff's lifestyle would help resolve some of his symptoms.
109  The plaintiff complained to Mr. Lawless that he cannot read much or use a computer for long periods because of his blurred vision and headaches. I have not found that the accident caused Mr. Rosso to suffer blurred vision and a long-term problem with headaches. If these problems are keeping him from working, they are not caused by the accident.
110  The plaintiff also complained to Mr. Lawless that his injuries have prevented him from pursuing his dream of becoming a commercially successful musician.
111  The plaintiff complained that lifting the guitar causes him neck and back pain. I accept there may initially have been some limitations in his guitar playing caused by these injuries but I am unpersuaded that the plaintiff made sufficient efforts to carry on with his music in a way that could address his neck and back pain. For example, there was no evidence that he tried to shift positions while playing, from standing or leaning on a stool to sitting. The plaintiff's main complaint regarding his inability to play the guitar had to do with his evidence that his hands go numb and sometimes do not function at all. I have found that these issues were not caused by the accident.
112  Vexing the analysis in this case is the fact that the plaintiff is someone that some of the medical professionals describe as having low motivation. I find that is an accurate description of a personality characteristic that pre-dated the accident.
113  Not everyone needs to be ambitious in the sense of wanting to achieve financial success. The plaintiff's pre-accident history suggests that he has never been highly motivated in the sense of being someone who wants to invest much time or effort in a career or in any other interest other than playing the guitar.
114  It was clear from the evidence of the two band members who testified, Mr. Van Woerkem and Eric Balana, that they get much enjoyment from playing and performing music. They are willing to work long term in the restaurant industry in order to pay their bills so they can pursue this passion. I have great respect for this choice. Indeed, I admire the sacrifice and the passion for one's art that goes into being an artist.
115  One question is whether the accident caused Mr. Rosso a loss of future earning capacity in the music industry. To award damages on this basis, there must have been a real and substantial possibility he would have earned income in that career, which is now foreclosed to him because of the injuries caused by the accident: Perren v. Lalari,  at paras. 25-32.
116  There is no evidence to establish any realistic possibility that but for the accident the plaintiff would have reached commercial success as a musical artist. There is no independent witness who testified that his musical talent or other characteristics such as charisma or stage presence were such that there was a real possibility he would in the future be able to make some kind of living from performing his music. He had not achieved a measurable level of commercial success as a musician by the age of 31, despite years of trying. I find that absent the accident, Mr. Rosso's musical endeavours were not a realistic possible source of future net income.
117  Another question is whether the accident caused Mr. Rosso a loss of earning capacity generally. On the whole of the evidence, I conclude that the plaintiff's injuries caused by the accident do not prevent him from working.
118  Mr. Rosso was an adult with a sufficient history before the accident to enable us to predict what his likely future would have been. Even without the accident, I find that Mr. Rosso would likely have remained a person earning entry-level pay at a low skilled job, and who would not stay with any one job for a long time, and who would focus on his artistic interests to giving him life satisfaction. I find that before the accident, he had a consistent lack of enthusiasm for his choices of paid employment and this is reflected in the fact that his past employment history was spotted with periods of unemployment. His lack of enthusiasm for paid employment was likely to continue and the occasional period of unemployment was likely to occur in the future as well, and I find no realistic possibility his employment future would have been otherwise.
119  In short, there is no evidence to suggest any realistic possibility that but for the accident, in the future Mr. Rosso's employment history would have changed from what he was doing: working a series of low skilled jobs, never staying with one for any length of time.
120  Noting Mr. Rosso's lack of enthusiasm for paid work is not a moral judgment. There is much to be admired about an artist's pursuit of his form of art. It is simply a fact that Mr. Rosso has never been motivated by and has not put much energy into paid employment. Instead, he has been content to play the guitar as his passion, regardless of this not being commercially lucrative.
121  In Brown v. Golaiy  (S.C.) [Brown], the Court cited the Supreme Court of Canada case of Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd.,  for the proposition that loss of earning capacity is the loss of a capital asset, requiring the court to consider the accident victim's earning prospects and potential prior to the accident. As held by Finch J. as he then was in Brown at para. 8:
The means by which the value of the lost, or impaired, asset is to be assessed varies of course from case to case. Some of the considerations to take into account in making that assessment include whether:
the plaintiff has been rendered less capable overall from earning income from all types of employment;
the plaintiff is less marketable or attractive as an employee to potential employers;
the plaintiff has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities which might otherwise have been open to him, had he not been injured; and
the plaintiff is less valuable to himself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market.
122  In Brown, the Court held that the plaintiff's future outlook was uncertain, but that the plaintiff's knee pain did diminish his capital asset, namely his worth as a worker. The Court awarded the plaintiff the rough equivalent of one year's income at his prior employment as a truck driver.
123  While I do not find that the accident-related injuries will prevent the plaintiff from participating in paid employment, I must consider the possibility that working at a job that involves driving a car might be foreclosed to Mr. Rosso due to his injuries, or even a job that involves hard physical labour. Mr. Rosso's description of his pain with prolonged sitting, if accepted, could foreclose these types of jobs.
124  While I do not consider that Mr. Rosso's neck and back pain is as debilitating as he suggests, I do accept that it could make him uncomfortable with prolonged periods of sitting. This means that his injuries caused by the accident have impaired the capital asset that is his earning capacity.
125  I therefore find that there is a reasonable possibility he could have found other work as a delivery driver, given his experience in this work, prior to the accident, or more physical work, and that his neck and back pain caused by the accident has either foreclosed or diminished this possibility. This means that he has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities that might have otherwise been open to him, and he has suffered a loss of future earning capacity.
126  I am unable to place a high value on this loss.
127  The evidence does not satisfy me that the neck and back injuries sustained in the accident were of a nature as to prevent Mr. Rosso from being able to work at an entry-level low-skilled job paying just as much as he could have earned absent the accident. I also am of the view that regardless of the accident, he would not have stayed with any one job for a long period, and so would not have earned multiple wage increases, and may have had some periods of unemployment.
128  If the job market is such that there are many entry level positions available, Mr. Rosso may not suffer an economic loss in the future. However, if the job market is such that there are limited positions available, he could suffer a loss because of his more limited choices and his inability to build on his experience as a delivery driver due to his injuries.
129  Considering the above contingent but real possibilities, I assess the plaintiff's loss of future earning capacity as equivalent to one year's income earned by him as a delivery driver, in the year prior to the accident, which I will round up to <damage type = "future wage loss">$23,000</damage>.
Past Loss of Income
130  As for past loss of income, I accept that the plaintiff may have needed some time post-accident to pursue therapies and exercise so as to best recover from his injuries. His job driving a car delivering auto parts required some prolonged sitting, and occasional lifting of heavy objects. It is realistic to conclude that the plaintiff would not be able to immediately return to that employment pending some time for therapies and that once he made an effort to return, he would have been fired (as he was) and so would have needed to seek out alternative employment (which was his plan before the accident).
131  I conclude that but for his injuries, the plaintiff would have been capable of continuing on with his employment at the auto parts company until his employer followed through on its decision to terminate his employment. The plaintiff's former manager at that employer testified at trial, Mr. John Salter. His evidence was that in January 2011, before the car accident, the decision had been made to terminate Mr. Rosso's employment. The manager then took his own disability leave for two weeks, in early February 2011. When the car accident occurred and the plaintiff was recovering and on disability insurance, the decision to terminate his employment was deferred until he gave notice of an interest in returning to work.
132  Thus, but for the car accident, the plaintiff likely would have suffered a loss of employment earlier than he did, at least by March 2011 instead of March 2012. Equally, but for the accident, once he lost his job for other reasons, the plaintiff would have been out of work for a period while he pursued alternate employment. It is difficult to know how long he would have been unemployed since he had not found alternative work before the accident, despite wanting to leave his employment.
133  Nevertheless, had the plaintiff been terminated, absent the accident there is a reasonable possibility this would have made him more motivated to find replacement work.
134  I find that there is a substantial possibility that but for the accident, the plaintiff would have been terminated from his employment in March 2011, given two weeks' severance in lieu of notice, and then would have been able to find another job paying at least an equivalent income during that two-week period and carried on with that new employment. In other words, but for the accident, he would not have suffered a past loss of income even if fired from his job as an auto parts delivery driver.
135  I conclude that due to the accident the plaintiff suffered a past loss of income equivalent to what he was earning at his employment as of the date of the accident, for a reasonable period of time to allow him to recover from his injuries. There is very little evidence on which to base a reasonable estimate of this period of time, given the plaintiff's unreliable perception of his inabilities. However, I note that after a three-month period of daily exercise with the assistance of his mother, from November 2012 to February 2013, he improved significantly.
136  I find it reasonable to assume that the plaintiff's injuries would have been in a more acute phase right after the accident as compared to in November 2012, and that he would need three times as much time to recover as the three months he later spent with his mother. I estimate that he would have needed approximately nine months of therapy and exercise to recover sufficiently from his injuries to pursue and obtain paid employment.
137  I conclude that the plaintiff suffered a past wage loss equivalent to nine months of income, at the same income level as he was earning at the time of his accident.
138  The parties have the figures from which they ought to be able to calculate and agree on this loss for which the disability insurer has a subrogated claim. If they are unable to reach agreement, they may seek a further hearing before me.
Cost of Future Care
139  The evidence does not support a claim that the injuries caused by the accident will cause the plaintiff to incur costs of future care, other than cost to attend yoga.
140  The evidence does persuade me that participation in yoga has proven the most effective treatment for Mr. Rosso's neck and back pain, and that in order to maximize his ability to perform other daily functions including paid work, he will need to continue to practice yoga.
141  The defendants argue that Mr. Rosso can practice yoga at home. This is true, in part, but overlooks the benefit of being instructed by a trained yoga professional, at least on occasion.
142  I must also take into account the contingency that but for the accident the plaintiff would have pursued yoga classes in any event, given that his mother practices yoga as a form of healthy lifestyle, as does his brother who is a yoga teacher. I also take into account the possibility that given the plaintiff's personality and low level of motivation, he could eventually drop out of practicing yoga.
143  The evidence is thin but considering the various contingencies I assess damages for the future cost of yoga classes, as a form of treatment necessitated by the injuries caused by the accident, at <damage type = "future care">$10,000</damage>.
Special Damages
144  The plaintiff claims <damage type = "other">$3,647.50</damage> as special damages, for a list of items including physiotherapy, massage therapy, acupuncture, BC transit passes, some medications (muscle relaxants), and a $47 gym membership.
145  The defendants say only <damage type = "other">$1,000</damage> is a reasonable assessment of special damages. They point out that the plaintiff needed a transit pass in any event since he did not have a car pre-accident; and some of the treatments were because of his constellation of symptoms that were not caused by the accident; and some were not recommended by physicians (such as osteopathy).
146  I find that it was reasonable and necessary for the plaintiff to seek out relief from neck and back pain by pursuing some physiotherapy and acupuncture treatments, but the defendants' criticisms with respect to the entire special damages claim are well-founded.
147  I assess the plaintiff's special damages as <damage type = "special">$1,000</damage>.
Non-Pecuniary Damages
148  I have found that the plaintiff did suffer neck and back pain caused by the accident, and this is likely to continue at a minor or moderate level into the future.
149  Non-pecuniary damages are awarded to take into account the non-economic impacts an accident can have on someone's enjoyment of life, including on such things as their relationships, lifestyle, and recreational activities, taking into account the person's age and the nature of the injuries, as canvassed in Stapley v. Hejslet, .
150  It is difficult to untangle the factors that have negatively impacted on Mr. Rosso's enjoyment of life since the accident so as to focus only on those caused by the accident.
151  There is no doubt that the plaintiff's biggest enjoyment in life, pre-accident, came from playing his guitar.
152  I accept the plaintiff's evidence that he suffered more discomfort immediately after the accident than he does now, but that his neck and back pain continues to negatively affect his guitar playing to some extent.
153  However, the plaintiff also complains that his arm and hand problems negatively affect his guitar playing. I have found these ongoing symptoms were not caused by the accident.
154  The plaintiff's enjoyment of life has been negatively affected by other circumstances in his life, leading to a psychological condition diagnosed by Dr. O'Shaughnessy as Persistent Depressive Disorder. I have concluded that this condition was not caused by the accident.
155  I find that the accident caused Mr. Rosso some loss of enjoyment of life which will continue in the future, as he will likely experience ongoing mild neck and back pain. This probably has interfered with his sleep to some extent in the past, and initially caused some headaches and fear around driving.
156  If Mr. Rosso attends yoga and finds other life interests including paid work and some form of artistic outlet, he is likely to increase his enjoyment of life. He has been awarded damages to compensate him for attending yoga and so it is important not to duplicate these damages under this heading.
157  I have considered the range of non-pecuniary damages in a number of other cases where the injuries are modest, such as in Pond v. Bucsis,  where <damage type = "other">$30,000</damage> was assessed as an appropriate award for mild soft tissue injury to the plaintiff's neck. The pain was not severe but was likely chronic and had some modest impact on her recreational activities. In that case, the award was then reduced by 30% for failure to mitigate.
158  Here I find that the injuries are minor and have had a minor impact on Mr. Rosso's life, especially in comparison to other circumstances in his life, such as the death of a close friend and his inability to become a commercially successful rock musician. I conclude that a fair and reasonable assessment of non-pecuniary damages is <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$20,000</damage>.
Conclusions
159  I have found that the plaintiff has suffered from some mild ongoing neck and back pain due to the accident.
160  I do not find that the plaintiff's injuries caused by the accident are so severe that they prevent him from working.
161  I have assessed the plaintiff's damages as follows:
damages for loss of future earning capacity in the amount of <damage type = "future wage loss">$23,000</damage>;
past income loss equivalent to nine months of income, at the same income level as he was earning at the time of his accident. If the parties are unable to agree on this number, they have liberty to re-appear before me;
cost of future care for yoga classes in the amount of <damage type = "future care">$10,000</damage>;
special damages of <damage type = "special">$1,000</damage>; and,
non-pecuniary damages of <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$20,000</damage>.
162  Costs will be awarded to the plaintiff unless there are issues impacting costs which the parties seek to draw to my attention.
163  I commend both counsel for their helpful submissions.
S.A. GRIFFIN J.
End of Document
Akbari v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia, [2012] B.C.J. No. 2451
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
W.G. Baker J.
Heard: August 31, September 1-2 and November 7, 2011.
Judgment: November 23, 2012.
Docket: M110131
Registry: Vancouver
[2012] B.C.J. No. 2451   |   2012 BCSC 1749
Between Sardar Akbari, Plaintiff, and Insurance Corporation of British Columbia, Defendant
(92 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Body injuries — Soft tissue — Action by Akbari for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident allowed — Akbari's vehicle collided with a light standard after a vehicle allegedly crossed his path suddenly — The defendant ICBC disputed that another vehicle was involved — The testimony of Akbari and his passenger was credible and persuasive — The accident was caused by the negligence of an unidentified driver, whose identity Akbari made all reasonable efforts to ascertain — Akbari sustained a soft tissue injury — He was awarded $12,000 in non-pecuniary damages, $1,237 for past wage loss and $385 in special damages.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Retroactive loss of income — Special damages — Expenses and expenditures — Medical — Medications — Therapy or rehabilitation — Non-pecuniary loss — Action by Akbari for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident allowed — Akbari's vehicle collided with a light standard after a vehicle allegedly crossed his path suddenly — The defendant ICBC disputed that another vehicle was involved — The testimony of Akbari and his passenger was credible and persuasive — The accident was caused by the negligence of an unidentified driver, whose identity Akbari made all reasonable efforts to ascertain — Akbari sustained a soft tissue injury — He was awarded $12,000 in non-pecuniary damages, $1,237 for past wage loss and $385 in special damages.
Insurance law — Actions — By insured against insurer — Action by Akbari for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident allowed — Akbari's vehicle collided with a light standard after a vehicle allegedly crossed his path suddenly — The defendant ICBC disputed that another vehicle was involved — The testimony of Akbari and his passenger was credible and persuasive — The accident was caused by the negligence of an unidentified driver, whose identity Akbari made all reasonable efforts to ascertain — Akbari sustained a soft tissue injury — He was awarded $12,000 in non-pecuniary damages, $1,237 for past wage loss and $385 in special damages.
Action by Akbari for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident. Akbari's vehicle collided with a light standard. Akbari took the position that the accident happened because he had to take evasive action to avoid a collision with a vehicle which suddenly pulled out directly across his path. Akbari further submitted that he made all reasonable efforts to identify the driver, who did not stop at the accident scene, but had been unable to ascertain the driver's identity. The defendant insurer, ICBC, disputed Akbari's claim that a second vehicle was involved. ICBC also took the position that Akbari failed to take all reasonable steps to ascertain the identity of the driver of the vehicle he claimed caused the accident. ICBC therefore submitted that Akbari was barred from recovering judgment for damages for his injuries. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 The testimony of Akbari and his passenger was credible and persuasive. It was more probable than not that Akbari was forced to take evasive action to avoid colliding with a vehicle crossing his path and that in doing so, his vehicle swerved on the wet roadway and spun out of control. Therefore, the accident was caused by the negligence of an unidentified driver. Akbari made all reasonable efforts to ascertain the identity of the unknown driver but the identity was not ascertainable. Akbari sustained a soft tissue injury and was disabled from his employment for two weeks. He was awarded <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$12,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages, <damage type = "past wage loss">$1,237</damage> for past loss of income and <damage type = "special">$385</damage> in special damages.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Insurance (Vehicle) Act,
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: Bruce A. McIntosh.
Counsel for the Defendant: Tanya Heuchert.
Reasons for Judgment
W.G. BAKER J.
1   On December 8, 2010, the plaintiff was driving on Nordel Way in Delta when the vehicle he was driving collided with a light standard. Although the direction in which he was travelling would most accurately be described as north-easterly, for the sake of convenience, and because it will make no difference to the narrative, in these Reasons I shall refer to Nordel Way as a north-south street and 84th Avenue as an east-west avenue. Mr. Akbari was north-bound on Nordel Way, heading out of Delta towards Surrey.
2  Mr. Akbari says that the accident happened because he had to take evasive action to avoid a collision with a vehicle, driven by an unidentified driver, which suddenly pulled out directly across his path of travel. Mr. Akbari alleges that the unidentified driver entered the intersection of Nordel Way and 84th Avenue against a red light for traffic on 84th Avenue, and that that driver's negligence was the sole cause of the accident. Mr. Akbari says that he made all reasonable efforts to identify the driver, who did not stop at the scene of the accident, but has been unsuccessful in ascertaining his identity.
3  The defendant insurer (ICBC) disputes the plaintiff's claim that a second vehicle was involved in the accident. ICBC says that Mr. Akbari simply lost control of his vehicle - possibly due to excessive speed for the wet road conditions - and struck the pole. The defendant also alleges that Mr. Akbari failed to take all reasonable steps to ascertain the identity of the driver and/or owner of the vehicle he claims caused the accident; and is therefore barred from recovering judgment for damages for his injuries.
FACTS
4  Mr. Akbari was born in January 1992; he was 18 when the accident happened and 21 when he testified at trial. On December 8, 2010, he had worked an afternoon shift at Genco Home Depot Distribution, described as a "third-party logistics company". I understand that Genco's primary function is to warehouse products for a large home improvement retailer. That day Mr. Akbari was working as a shift "lead hand". He had recently moved from working on the "graveyard shift" to working afternoon shifts, Monday to Friday. The afternoon shift started at 2:45 p.m. and ended at 11:15 p.m.
5  Mr. Akbari had driven to work that day in his father's vehicle - a 2008 Chevrolet Cobalt 4-door sedan. Mr. Akbari had only recently acquired his "N" driver's licence. Sometime during the shift, Mr. Akbari offered to give a ride to his friend and co-worker, Jose' Perez, at the end of the shift.
6  Jose' Perez testified at trial. He was the front seat passenger in Mr. Akbari's vehicle when the accident happened. Mr. Akbari told Mr. Perez that he would be driving to the Surrey Central Skytrain Station to pick up his sister. Mr. Perez told Mr. Akbari that he could drop him off at the Station and he would catch the midnight bus to his home. Mr. Perez said that if he missed the midnight bus, he would have to wait an hour for another bus. He had often encountered Mr. Akbari on the same bus in the past and was confident that Mr. Akbari knew the bus schedule.
7  Mr. Perez believed that the vehicle Mr. Akbari was driving belonged to Mr. Akbari. He testified that he believed Mr. Akbari had purchased the Cobalt, for cash, about a month earlier, and had only had his driver's licence for about a week prior to December 8, 2010. He said the Cobalt appeared to be in good shape. Mr. Akbari had told him he had had the tires replaced recently; that Mr. Akbari had driven against a curb and popped the rims off his tires, so had bought new tires. Mr. Akbari testified that he had not told his father about this incident with the vehicle for several months after it happened.
8  Although the shift ended at Genco at 11:15 p.m., Mr. Akbari had some things to complete at the end of the shift, and Mr. Perez waited for him. Mr. Akbari's best recollection was that the two men were in the vehicle and driving away from Genco by 11:25 p.m.; Mr. Perez thought it might have been as late as 11:35 but he wasn't sure. It was dark and rain was falling. Mr. Akbari estimated that it usually took about 10 minutes to drive from his workplace to the intersection where the accident happened. Mr. Perez testified that it takes "a lot more than 5 minutes" but not as much as 20 minutes unless you drive "like a turtle".
9  Once on Nordel Way, Mr. Akbari was driving in a north-easterly direction, heading to Surrey. He was in the lane closest to the center line. He estimated his speed at 50 to 60 kph.
10  Mr. Perez testified he was very familiar with the route the two men were driving; that he was on that road every day. He said that he and Mr. Akbari did not have the car stereo on and were not talking a lot. Mr. Perez was quite tired. He had no memory of Mr. Akbari using his cell phone while driving; or of any other distraction. Mr. Perez recalled looking at his own cell phone to check the time; he said that he saw that he had received a message but did not read the message.
11  84th Avenue intersects Nordel Way. As Mr. Akbari was approaching the intersection and from some distance away he could see that the traffic light was red for traffic on Nordel Way. Anticipating that he might have to stop for the red light, he took his foot off the accelerator and put it over the brake but recalled that he did not depress the brake pedal. He believes his vehicle slowed only a little as it approached the intersection.
12  Mr. Perez recalled events a little differently. He also recalled that the light for traffic on Nordel Way was red as he and Mr. Akbari were approaching the intersection with 84th Avenue. He recalled that Mr. Akbari had reduced speed and estimated that the Akbari vehicle was travelling only 25 or 30 kph as they neared the intersection. He testified that he believes Mr. Akbari could have safely brought his vehicle to a stop if the light had remained red. Mr. Perez recalled seeing a westbound vehicle on 84th Avenue cross over Nordel Way and turn left to go southbound as they were approaching the intersection. Mr. Akbari recalled that at least one and perhaps more vehicles had turned left from 84th Avenue to go south on Nordel Way.
13  As they neared the intersection, the light for traffic on Nordel Way turned green and Mr. Akbari returned his foot to the accelerator and his vehicle began to speed up. He believes he might have reached a speed of 50 or 60 kph by the time he got to the intersection.
14  Both Mr. Perez and Mr. Akbari testified that after the light turned green for traffic on Nordel Way and red for traffic on 84th Avenue; a light-colored smaller car -silver or perhaps white - entered the intersection from their right (westbound on 84th Avenue) and crossed directly in front of them. Mr. Perez had the impression this vehicle was trying to beat the red light, but he was adamant that the light for traffic on 84th had turned red before the light-colored vehicle entered the intersection. Mr. Akbari braked and pulled his vehicle hard to the right to avoid striking the light-colored vehicle. His vehicle spun in a clockwise direction, went up onto the median on the right (east) side of Nordel Way and the driver's side of the vehicle struck a light standard.
15  There are two northbound lanes on Nordel Way as it approaches 84th Avenue but close to the intersection, a third lane - for vehicles turning right from Nordel Way onto 84th Avenue - opens up. There is also a merge lane for traffic coming from 84th Avenue turning right onto Nordel Way. On the northeast corner of the intersection, the merge lane is separated from the two northbound lanes of Nordel Way by a triangular-shaped median and on this median there is a light standard. At the top of the pole there is a street-light for illumination of the intersection; there is also a cross-bar that extends from the pole across Nordel Way, with traffic lights suspended from the cross-bar.
16  In his testimony, Mr. Perez said that Mr. Akbari "lost control" of his vehicle after he swerved to avoid a collision with the vehicle crossing the intersection. Mr. Akbari testified that if had not braked and swerved he would have struck the driver's side door of the vehicle crossing his path.
17  Other than the description that the vehicle was a smaller car and that it was light-colored, neither Mr. Perez nor Mr. Akbari were able to be specific about the vehicle, or any persons inside the vehicle, that crossed their path. Mr. Perez thought the vehicle was "silver-colored"; Mr. Akbari thought it was white. Mr. Perez thought it looked something like a slim Chevrolet Cavalier. Both men were quite certain that they were very close to the intersection when the car drove across their path; and that the light had already turned green for traffic on Nordel Way before the other car entered the intersection from 84th Avenue.
18  Mr. Perez recalls striking his head on the window of the passenger-side door and feeling dazed or perhaps losing consciousness for a very short time. He says that the air bags in the vehicle did not deploy. He could hear the car horn blaring. He undid his seatbelt and opened the passenger side front door. He could see that the door on Mr. Akbari's side was against the pole and could not open. He tried to help Mr. Akbari, whose feet seemed to be trapped in the foot well. Mr. Perez felt weak and shaky.
19  Mr. Perez recalled that two men appeared at the vehicle - one man helped him to get out and told him to sit down beside the road; the other man helped Mr. Akbari to climb across the seats and exit the passenger side door.
20  Mr. Perez could not recall if the two men had identified themselves - he thought they had, but he could not recall the names. He said both men were Caucasian and both spoke English; the man who helped him had a beard.
21  Mr. Perez recalls that after he got out of Mr. Akbari's vehicle he looked to see if the light-colored car that had driven across their path was still at the scene but could see no sign of it. He saw Mr. Akbari who was also out of the vehicle and he could see that he had blood on his hands and also that Mr. Akbari was limping. He saw Mr. Akbari walk to the front of his vehicle and heard him say "Oh my God, oh my God". He heard Mr. Akbari's cell phone ring and saw Mr. Akbari answer the call and heard him say "Hey baby, I just got in a car accident" and then "I gotta go, I gotta go".
22  Mr. Akbari recalled being helped to the side of the road by the two men who had come up to his vehicle. He recalled asking them if they had seen anything and that they said they had not; that they were just coming around the corner.
23  Mr. Akbari recalled his girlfriend calling him right after the collision with the light standard; and that he told her he had been in an accident and that he ended the call so he could call his father.
24  Mr. Perez recalled that emergency personnel arrived and one of them approached him, but he could not recall what questions he was asked or what he said in response. He recalled that a police officer spoke to him while he was in an ambulance. Mr. Akbari recalled that ambulance personnel treated cuts on his hand. He and Mr. Perez both declined an offer to go to hospital in the ambulance. Both men recalled speaking to a police officer at the scene and both recalled telling the officer that they had been cut off by a small white or silver-colored sedan that crossed their path. Mr. Perez recalled being driven to the police detachment in a police car and that Mr. Akbari's father met them there and drove them home.
25  After driving Mr. Perez home, Mr. Akbari's father drove Mr. Akbari home and the two men placed a call to ICBC and reported the accident.
26  Constable Da Silva, a member of the Delta Police Department, testified that he was on duty on December 8 and arrived at the accident scene at about 11:43 p.m. Constable Da Silva had only been with the Delta Police for a very short time in December 2010. He testified that the police despatch records showed that a call reporting the accident had come in at 11:40 from a nearby resident, who had heard, but not seen, the crash.
27  When he arrived at the scene, there was no one in Mr. Akbari's vehicle, which was lodged against the light standard. Mr. Akbari and Mr. Perez - (for reasons never explained at trial, Constable Da Silva recorded Mr. Perez's surname as "Del Aguila") - were sitting in a "van" - I infer that he meant sitting in an ambulance. He asked the two men what had happened. Constable Da Silva recalled that Mr. Perez said a car had run a red light. The officer recalled that Mr. Akbari said something similar - that a white sedan had run a red light and cut him off. Both young men seemed shocked and in distress.
28  Constable Da Silva understood that the collision had happened about five minutes before he arrived at the scene. He did not see a white car at the scene, and did not initiate a search for one. His primary concerns were, he said, the two young men; and traffic control at the intersection. He was told there were two witnesses and he found B. and S. Shiles in a vehicle parked nearby. He spoke to them. They said they had been travelling on 84th Avenue heading east; had heard a collision, looked back and saw a vehicle against a pole. He asked them if they knew what had caused the accident and they said they did not know; that they had not seen any other vehicles. They also said that the light for traffic on Nordel Way was green when the accident happened.
29  Constable Da Silva filled out a police report about the accident but did not do any further investigation. He recalled that Mr. Akbari called him a few days later and asked if there were traffic cameras at the intersection. He understood that Mr. Akbari was hoping to get a photograph of the other vehicle. Constable Da Silva told Mr. Akbari he would check whether there was a camera at the intersection, but he never did. He couldn't recall why he had not responded to Mr. Akbari's request; he thought perhaps he had been too busy.
30  Constable Da Silva agreed that there is a townhouse complex on 84th Avenue near the intersection; he was not sure if it is accessible to non-residents. He said there are no other homes nearby.
31  Three other witnesses testified about the collision and its aftermath. The first of these was Nahun Chinchilla, who testified in the plaintiff's case, with the assistance of a Spanish interpreter. Mr. Chinchilla was 37 years old at time of trial; he had immigrated to Canada from El Salvador where, he testified, he had worked as an investigator with the National Civil Police. Mr. Chinchilla's comprehension of spoken and written English is not good - he said he understands perhaps only 10 or 15% of spoken English.
32  I found Mr. Chinchilla's testimony to be improbable and incredible. Mr. Chinchilla testified that he was driving westbound on 84th Avenue between 10:30 and 11:00 p.m. on December 9, 2010, intending to turn right (northbound) onto Nordel Way. He said there were two vehicles ahead of him; that the first vehicle went through the intersection and the second one stopped. He recalled seeing a light and hearing a loud noise - a bang - and that he stopped his vehicle immediately and saw that there was a silver car against a post, pointed in the wrong direction. Mr. Chinchilla testified that he put his emergency brake on; got out of his vehicle and approached the car that had hit the post. He said he went to the driver's side to ask the driver if he was alright. In chief, he initially said that the driver was conscious but did not appear to understand what Mr. Chinchilla was saying. Later, in chief, he said he asked the driver "Are you okay" and the driver said "yes". In cross-examination, he claimed that the driver said he was fine. He said the driver was conscious, so he gave the driver his business card and then he got back in his vehicle and left the scene. He said he didn't see any other people at the scene of the accident.
33  Mr. Chinchilla was asked if he called 911. He said he tried to call 911 and also tried to call some other people but was too nervous to say anything when his calls were answered.
34  Mr. Chinchilla said that a few days after the accident he saw a sign on a pole at the intersection of Nordel Way and 84th Avenue and that he called the two telephone numbers written on the sign but could not get through to anyone. He says that he then looked up a number for ICBC and called the Corporation. He said he asked to speak to someone at ICBC who could speak Spanish and that he told that person about having witnessed the accident. He said ICBC sent him a form and he filled it in and mailed it back. He said a private investigator working for ICBC had called him numerous times but he refused to meet with him and eventually got a new cell phone so the investigator could not reach him. He said he also received several calls from individuals who left messages identifying themselves as police officers but because the calls showed up "Private Caller" on his caller identification system, he did not return the calls.
35  As I stated earlier, I found Mr. Chinchilla's testimony to be improbable and incredible. Mr. Akbari did not recall Mr. Chinchilla speaking to him at the scene of the accident. Mr. Perez did not recall Mr. Chinchilla being there, and he was not seen by either B. or S. Shiles, who did assist Mr. Akbari and Mr. Perez at the scene. Mr. Perez was in or very near the vehicle at the relevant time, and Messrs. Shiles arrived in a very short time, possibly only seconds, after the collision happened, but Mr. Chinchilla said he saw no one but the driver at the scene of the accident.
36  Mr. Chinchilla testified about where he was coming from and going to at the time he says he witnessed the accident, but given his starting point and destination, 84th Avenue was an unusual and far from direct route. He responded to that suggestion by saying that there was a fire, and police were redirecting traffic from the route he would ordinarily have taken. In an interview with plaintiff's counsel, he said there was a fire at a specific clothing store that he named; at trial, he said that perhaps there was a fire or maybe it was an accident that caused police to redirect traffic. Eventually he agreed that if he was westbound on 84th Avenue and planning to go north on Nordel Way, he was actually driving in the opposite direction from the location of his destination.
37  Mr. Chinchilla testified that he stopped at the scene because he was trained in first aid. However, he also said he drove away and did not actually try to help Mr. Akbari because he was traumatized and suffering from nervous shock.
38  Mr. Chinchilla claimed he had never spoken to Mr. Akbari on the telephone, and did not even know Mr. Akbari's name until he was introduced to him outside the courtroom at trial. Mr. Akbari testified, however, that he had spoken with Mr. Chinchilla on the telephone a few weeks after the accident happened.
39  I do not know what to make of Mr. Chinchilla's testimony. I am satisfied he did not stop at the scene of the accident and did not speak to Mr. Akbari there. It is possible that he did see the accident and felt guilty about not having stopped to offer assistance, and so concocted part of his testimony to present himself in a more favourable light. As I cannot separate truth from fiction, however, I must consider him to be an unreliable witness and I give no weight to any part of his testimony.
40  Barry Shiles ("B. Shiles") testified as a witness for the defence, as did his son, Scott Shiles ("S. Shiles"). B. Shiles is retired; he lives in Delta less than one kilometre from where the accident happened. On that night, he was driving his 1999 Mazda truck, which has a canopy on the back, and S. Shiles was his passenger. B. Shiles was driving S. Shiles home from work. They were northbound on Nordel, some distance ahead of Mr. Akbari's vehicle. The Shiles vehicle turned right off Nordel Way onto 84th Avenue. B. Shiles recalled that the light for traffic northbound on Nordel was already green when he made his right turn onto 84th. He estimated that he was travelling about 30 kph; and that he was still merging onto 84th Avenue when he heard a bang and the sound of screaming tires. He looked in his rear view mirror - in cross-examination he said he was referring to the wing mirror on the driver's side of his truck - and saw a car slide across the intersection onto the island and hit the light pole. When the car struck the pole he heard a second bang.
41  B. Shiles drove a couple of car-lengths and then made a u-turn and drove back to the intersection and parked his vehicle where it would block other vehicles turning north off 84th Avenue onto Nordel. B. Shiles estimated that it took 10 to 20 seconds to make the u-turn and park his vehicle. He and S. Shiles got out of their vehicle. B. Shiles tried to call 911 on his cell phone but it was dark and he was not wearing his glasses, so he had no success. S. Shiles told him not to worry, that he had already called 911 on his cell phone. B. Shiles did not see any other vehicles stopped in the vicinity and did not see anyone approach Mr. Akbari's vehicle.
42  B. Shiles recalled that Mr. Akbari's car had spun around before striking the pole and was facing the wrong way. B. Shiles recalled that S. Shiles reached Mr. Akbari's vehicle first. Mr. Perez was already outside the vehicle; Mr. Akbari was still inside it. Eventually he was able to get out of the vehicle by climbing across the seat and exiting the passenger side door. S. Shiles has first-aid training so B. Shiles left it to him to deal with the driver and passenger. The Akbari vehicle's horn was blaring and B. Shiles lifted the hood of Mr. Akbari's vehicle to try to disengage the horn, but was unable to do so.
43  B. Shiles does not recall Mr. Akbari asking him if he had seen what happened and does not recall saying "I didn't see, I was taking the corner". However, he did not deny having this exchange with Mr. Akbari.
44  B. Shiles recalled staying at the accident scene for 30 to 40 minutes. He recalled that the fire and emergency vehicle arrived first; a police car second; and the ambulance came last. He spoke to a police officer and told the officer he had seen Mr. Akbari's vehicle hit the light pole. He testified the police officer did not ask him whether he had seen any other vehicles. This testimony is contradicted by that of Constable Da Silva, who testified that he asked both B. and S. Shiles if they knew what had caused the accident and both said they did not.
45  B. Shiles was contacted by an ICBC employee on January 10, 2011, approximately one month after the accident happened. B. Shiles told the ICBC employee that he did not recall seeing any vehicles westbound on 84th Avenue at the intersection with Nordel when he turned right onto 84th Avenue, immediately before the accident happened. At trial, B. Shiles appeared quite certain that there were no vehicles on 84th waiting to turn south onto Nordel.
46  S. Shiles' testimony was similar to that of his father, but there were some differences. Like B. Shiles, he said he heard a loud bang and that was why he turned around to look back at the intersection. He did not look in the rear view mirror or a wing mirror, he looked through the back window of the truck and, I infer, through the back or a side window of the canopy. Unlike B. Shiles, S. Shiles said he did not actually see Mr. Akbari's vehicle hit the pole. He testified that as he was turning around he heard a second bang and saw that a vehicle had struck the pole.
47  S. Shiles testified that he told his father to turn around and to block the turn lane; and that he called 911. He saw no other vehicles stop or stopped at the scene and he did not see anyone approach Mr. Akbari's damaged vehicle. As he and his father drove up, he could see Mr. Perez getting out of the vehicle; Mr. Akbari was still in the driver's seat. He saw Mr. Perez assist Mr. Akbari to get out of the vehicle through the passenger side door.
48  B. Shiles noticed the damaged vehicle was starting to smoke, and heard its horn blaring. One of the two men who had exited the vehicle - S. Shiles believes it was the driver - was talking on his cell phone; S. Shiles asked him to hang up so he could assess the two men. He said both men were coherent, but said they were in pain. S. Shiles recalled the driver lamenting about the damage to his vehicle.
49  S. Shiles estimated that he and his father remained at the scene for between 40 and 45 minutes. During that time, he recalled, two fire trucks, four or five police cars and an ambulance came to the scene. He said a police officer took down their names and addresses, but did not ask them what they had seen.
50  S. Shiles said that some time later he received a telephone call from an ICBC employee. The employee asked him what he had observed and if another vehicle could have been involved in the accident. S. Shiles said that from what he could recall, he did not think another vehicle had been involved. He did not recall seeing any westbound vehicles on 84th Avenue waiting to turn onto Nordel.
51  Mr. Akbari made a call to ICBC's dial-a-claim line about two hours after the accident happened. He reported the accident as a hit and run. He said there were two witnesses. Dorothy Berry, the ICBC adjuster who testified for the defence, agreed that the information provided in the initial telephone report was consistent with the information later provided by Mr. Akbari when he met with her to provide a description of the accident. As Mr. Akbari was not cross-examined on any apparent inconsistencies in the statement, I infer that there were none.
52  The defendant submits that I should disbelieve the plaintiff's testimony that the accident was caused by the negligence of an unidentified motorist, who crossed Nordel against a red light and cut off Mr. Akbari's vehicle, forcing him to take evasive action, and resulting in the collision between Mr. Akbari's vehicle and the light standard. The defendant submits, and I agree, that Mr. Chinchilla's testimony should be rejected as incredible. The defendant submits that the Court should accept the testimony of B. and S. Shiles that there were no vehicles westbound on 84th Avenue immediately prior to the collision.
53  I am not persuaded by these submissions. I found the testimony of Mr. Akbari and Mr. Perez about how the accident happened to be credible and persuasive. I am satisfied that it is more probable than not that a westbound driver on 84th Avenue negligently crossed Nordel, contrary to a red light for traffic entering from 84th Avenue; and entered the intersection when Mr. Akbari's vehicle was so close to the intersection as to pose an immediate hazard.
54  I am satisfied that it is more probable than not that Mr. Akbari was forced to take evasive action to avoid colliding with the vehicle crossing his path; and that in doing so, his vehicle swerved on the wet roadway, spun out of control, and collided with the light standard. I am not satisfied that Mr. Akbari's actions were negligent or that he failed to meet the standard of care required of a reasonably prudent driver in the circumstances. I am not persuaded that Mr. Akbari was driving at an excessive speed. I accept that Mr. Akbari was anxious to get to the Skytrain Station to meet his sister, but according to the testimony of Mr. Perez, Mr. Akbari had slowed his vehicle as he approached the intersection and only began to accelerate when the light turned green for traffic on Nordel; and was not exceeding the speed limit as he neared the intersection.
55  I am satisfied that B. and S. Shiles are honest witnesses, who were doing their best to recall events that happened some time ago; but that they were mistaken in their recollection of events immediately before the accident. Neither of them had any particular reason to notice or recall whether they passed vehicles westbound on 84th Avenue as they turned right off Nordel. Both men agreed they drove through the intersection very often; it is unlikely that they would take particular note of the presence of other vehicles. They were not asked about the presence of other traffic vehicles at the intersection until January 10, 2011, more than a month after the night in question.
56  There is also the fact that both B. and S. Shiles recall hearing two "bangs". Both men testified that it was the first loud sound that caused them to look back at the intersection and that the second bang they heard was the sound of Mr. Akbari's vehicle striking the light pole. The evidence does not provide any explanation for the first "bang" the two men recall, however, as there is no evidence that Mr. Akbari's vehicle struck any other obstacle before it hit the light standard. If, as I infer, neither witness' attention was drawn to the intersection until they heard the sound caused by Mr. Akbari's vehicle striking the pole, the south-turning vehicle that crossed Mr. Akbari's path could already have been speeding away and it is unlikely that either witness would have noticed it or recalled seeing it.
57  Mr. Akbari and Mr. Perez were both shaken up by the accident, but both told the first police officer on the scene - Constable Da Silva - that Mr. Akbari had swerved to avoid hitting a vehicle that ran a red light and crossed their path. Constable Da Silva arrived no more than a few minutes after the collision happened. Both Mr. Akbari and Mr. Perez recalled the other vehicle as a small, light-colored car. It would have taken more presence of mind than I believe they possessed at the time, to concoct and agree upon a false story in the few minutes between the time the accident happened and the time Constable Da Silva spoke to them. Both men have consistently maintained that the accident was caused by the driver of an unidentified vehicle crossing their path. Although Mr. Akbari and Mr. Perez knew each other and were co-workers, the evidence does not support a conclusion that they were close friends.
58  In closing submissions, counsel for ICBC provided examples of alleged "inconsistencies" in Mr. Akbari's testimony that, the defendant submitted, should cause the Court to doubt the reliability of Mr. Akbari's testimony. Most of these inconsistencies were so minor as to be inconsequential; and in other instances, I am satisfied the evidence was misinterpreted or misunderstood by counsel. One of the alleged inconsistencies related to whether Mr. Akbari called his girlfriend immediately after the accident or she called him. On discovery, Mr. Akbari recalled that he tried to call her; at trial, he testified she phoned him. The latter answer is consistent with the telephone records. I am not persuaded this is anything other than a lack of recall of an event that was insignificant at the time. Other apparent inconsistencies were explained by Mr. Akbari. In any event, the inconsistencies do not cause me to doubt that accuracy or truthfulness of Mr. Akbari's testimony about how the accident happened.
59  The defendant submits that even if I conclude that the accident happened as Mr. Akbari says it did and that the accident was caused solely by the negligence of the unidentified driver, Mr. Akbari is nevertheless not entitled to recover damages for his injuries because of the application of Section 24 of the Insurance (Vehicle) Act. Section 24 provides that a judgment must not be given against ICBC as nominal defendant unless the court is satisfied that a plaintiff has made all reasonable efforts to ascertain the identity of the unknown driver and/or owner; and the identity of those persons is not ascertainable.
60  Counsel referred the Court to various authorities in which the application and interpretation of s. 24 have featured. These authorities indicate that what constitutes "all reasonable efforts" will depend on the factual matrix present in each case. Counsel cited Houniet v. ICBC, ; Meghji v. ICBC, ; Leggett v. ICBC,  (C.A.); Morris v. John Doe, ; Balicki v. ICBC, ; Becker v. ICBC, ; and Tessier v. City of Vancouver and ICBC, ; Jennings v. Doe, ; Vandervyl v. ICBC, , BCSC Vancouver Registry, No. C906820, March 31, 1993; Larsen v. Doe, ;
61  I am satisfied that Mr. Akbari did make all reasonable efforts to ascertain the identity of the unknown driver in the circumstances that pertained here. Mr. Akbari's vehicle could not be driven and he was injured and in pain; he could hardly be expected to attempt to pursue the southbound vehicle on foot. Mr. Akbari told the attending police officer - Constable Da Silva - that another vehicle had been involved and he provided a description of the vehicle as a light-colored - white or silver - small car. Mr. Perez confirmed the involvement of the other vehicle and the description. Constable Da Silva obviously considered there to be little or no prospect of locating the suspect vehicle even minutes after it had left the scene; he did make any effort to do so, or to alert other patrol cars to search for the vehicle.
62  Mr. Akbari recalls having inquired of Messrs. Shiles at the scene to find out if they had seen the vehicle that crossed his path. The accident was reported to the defendant as a "hit and run" within two hours after the collision happened. Both Mr. Akbari and his father provided statements to ICBC. Upon learning from his counsel of his obligation to attempt to ascertain the identity of the driver who left the scene, Mr. Akbari posted a sign at the intersection asking any witnesses to come forward. If any part of Mr. Chinchilla's testimony is to be believed, it is that he saw the sign on the past at the intersection, and it was that sign that prompted him to contact ICBC and, eventually, Mr. Akbari's counsel.
63  Mr. Akbari also contacted Constable Da Silva a few days after the accident and asked whether there was a traffic camera at the intersection where the accident happened. Constable Da Silva said if there was a camera, it likely took only one photo - when the light turned green - but he said he would check and get back to Mr. Akbari. It was reasonable for Mr. Akbari to assume that there was no camera - or no useful footage - when he heard nothing further from Constable Da Silva.
64  When Mr. Akbari realized that Ms. Berry did not know about Mr. Chinchilla and his claim to have witnessed the collision, he made sure that Ms. Berry was provided with the phone number he had for Mr. Chinchilla.
65  Counsel for the defendant suggested to Mr. Akbari that he should have canvassed the residents of the townhouse complex located near the intersection to search for possible witnesses, but I consider that would have been a fool's errand. The photographs of the scene indicate that the townhouse complex is some distance off the roadway and that it is highly unlikely that anyone in the townhouse complex would have been able to see anything happening in the intersection, particularly late at night, when it was dark and raining. The resident who did call to report the collision only did so because she heard the sound of the crash.
66  Counsel also suggested that Mr. Akbari could have staked out the intersection to see if he could spot the vehicle that crossed his path. Again, this would have been fruitless, I conclude, as neither he nor Mr. Perez was able to recall anything more specific than the fact that the other vehicle was a light-colored small car.
67  To summarize, I am satisfied that it is more probable than not that the accident was caused by the negligent actions of an unidentified driver who entered the intersection from 84th Avenue against a red light; and drove across Nordel, cutting off Mr. Akbari's vehicle when it was so close to the intersection as to pose an immediate hazard. I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that Mr. Akbari did not fail to meet the standard of care required of a reasonably prudent motorist when he swerved to avoid colliding with the vehicle crossing his path.
68  I am also satisfied that Mr. Akbari made all reasonable efforts to ascertain the identity of the unknown driver; and that the unknown driver's identity is not ascertainable.
DAMAGES
69  Mr. Akbari had some cuts on his hands from broken window glass; and a small cut on his head that were bleeding at the scene of the accident. Ambulance personnel wiped the blood away but no stitches were required. Mr. Akbari was also limping. Mr. Akbari testified that when he woke up the day after the accident his whole body was in pain. His sister, who is a nurse, drove him to a clinic. Mr. Akbari testified that he used a cane for two weeks because he could not walk well. He said he had pain in his back and his chest, his arms were bruised; and his hands hurt for three weeks.
70  The only medical evidence is the report of Dr. Pardeep Rai, dated June 2, 2011. The defendant did not require Dr. Rai's attendance at trial for cross-examination. Dr. Rai's report indicates that Mr. Akbari was first seen, following the accident, by Dr. Rukavina, on December 9, 2010. I infer that Dr. Rukavina practises in the same clinic as Dr. Rai, although Dr. Rai did not indicate that in his report, because Dr. Rai appears to have had access to Dr. Rukavina's clinical notes.
71  Dr. Rai reported that on December 9, Mr. Akbar was complaining of an abrasion to his left hand, and tenderness in his left calf, knee and thigh. He had normal grip strength in the left hand. The left leg was tender when palpated and there was some swelling in the thigh, knee and calf, but normal range of motion. According to the notes, Dr. Rukavina advised Mr. Akbar to take a week off work, and prescribed a muscle relaxant and anti-inflammatory medication.
72  By December 20, when Dr. Rai saw Mr. Akbar for the first time, Mr. Akbar was complaining of ongoing pain in his left calf, increased by weight-bearing. The swelling in the leg had decreased, but the calf remained tender to palpation, and Mr. Akbar was unable to point his foot downward and could not stand on his toes. Dr. Rai recommended stretching exercises; a further week off work; and to continue with the medications previously prescribed.
73  On December 29, Mr. Akbar saw Dr. Chemerika at the clinic. He was still reporting ongoing left hip and calf pain. He said he was unable to play soccer. On examination, Dr. Chemerika noted tenderness to palpation in the left calf; and a tender hip flexor (the inside groin region of the thigh) when Mr. Akbar lifted his thigh. However, Dr. Chemerika must have seen considerable improvement in Mr. Akbar's condition as he or she recommended a return to work; and that Mr. Akbar have physiotherapy.
74  Mr. Akbar did not see a doctor again until February 28, 2011. In the interim, he had physiotherapy on February 4, 7, and 16. On February 28, Mr. Akbar told Dr. Rai that he was still having some left calf pain but that the physiotherapy had helped to reduce the pain. There was only mild tenderness in the left calf, and the swelling was gone. Dr. Rai advised Mr. Akbar to continue with physiotherapy.
75  Mr. Akbar had physiotherapy on March 2, 18 and 30. He testified that he stopped going to physiotherapy because he could not afford it.
76  He returned to see Dr. Rai on May 13, 2011. He reported that the left calf pain was better and he had only occasional cramps at night that resolved within seconds. During heavy exercise he had some mild left hip and calf pain. He had good range of motion, no swelling and only mild tenderness in the left hip. There was no indication of tenderness remaining in the calf. Dr. Rai advised Mr. Akbar to take on all activities he could tolerate and discontinue physiotherapy.
77  In summary, Dr. Rai's opinion is that the most likely diagnosis is soft tissue injury - also described as "tendonious strain" - affecting Mr. Akbari's left calf, knee and thigh. He ruled out major tearing of muscles, although he could not exclude minor tearing. The recovery period, according to Dr. Rai, was 8 to 10 weeks.
PAST LOSS OF INCOME
78  At trial, Mr. Akbari was not certain how much time he had taken off work after his injuries; and whether he took the time off as paid vacation; or otherwise. Ms. Demosten, a Manager in Human Resources at Genco Distribution, provided ICBC with a certificate of earnings indicating that Mr. Akbari lost <damage type = "other">$1,511.84</damage> in gross pay and was off work due to the accident injuries from December 8, 2010 to December 22, 2010. She clarified her calculation at trial and adjusted the gross pay loss to <damage type = "other">$1,463.44</damage>. She testified that Mr. Akbari had originally booked time off for vacation from December 20 to 24 and had requested unpaid leave from December 24 to 27, but following the accident did not take all of the time as vacation, because of the accident. He returned to work on December 27.
79  Ms. Demosten also testified that when Mr. Akbari returned to work, he worked regular full-time hours, but there were some modifications to his duties to accommodate his injuries; although she could not recall any specifics, or for how long the modified duties had lasted. Mr. Akbari testified that when he went back to work he resumed training to be a lead hand, and essentially worked "light duties" for a period of six weeks. Eventually he gave up the lead hand position because he preferred to work a different shift.
80  Mr. Akbari testified that his employment with Genco had been terminated on August 8, 2011 and that he had been dismissed for poor attendance and for being late to work. Mr. Akbar does not allege that he lost his job because of his accident injuries.
81  Mr. Akbari testified at trial that he was hoping to find an office job, or a job in a call centre, or a sales job at Metrotown, where a friend was working. He agreed that his doctor had told him he could take on any physical activity that he could tolerate, but he hoped to find work that did not involve a lot of physical labour.
82  I conclude that Mr. Akbari was disabled from his employment for a period of two weeks. I award him the sum of <damage type = "past wage loss">$1,237</damage>, calculated by deducting from his <damage type = "other">$1,463</damage> gross pay an adjustment for income tax and employment insurance deductions, for a net award of <damage type = "past wage loss">$1,237</damage>. Dr. Chemerika recommended on December 28, 2010 that Mr. Akbari return to work and Mr. Akbari had essentially made a full recovery by the time he was seen by Dr. Rai in May 2011.
LOSS OF CAPACITY TO EARN INCOME IN FUTURE
83  I am satisfied that Mr. Akbari has made a full recovery and that his capacity to earn income in future has not been impaired by the accident injuries. I make no award for loss of capacity to earn income in future.
SPECIAL DAMAGES
84  Mr. Akbari proved special damages of <damage type = "special">$385</damage> for medications and physiotherapy and I award this sum. He also claimed <damage type = "other">$310.02</damage> for vehicle towing, but he did not plead this claim; and sought only damages for personal injury in his Notice of Civil Claim. It may be that Mr. Akbari is entitled to recover the cost of vehicle towing, but it is not a special damage that may be claimed in this action as it was not pleaded.
COST OF FUTURE CARE
85  The evidence does not support any award for cost of future care.
NON-PECUNIARY DAMAGES
86  I have already referred to Mr. Akbari's testimony about the discomfort he felt, specifically in his left leg, in the weeks and months following the accident. He also had pain in his left hand, and generalized pain for a couple of weeks after the accident. I am satisfied he had made a full recovery by the time he saw Dr. Rai in May 2011. Mr. Akbari testified that his leg injury interfered with his ability to play recreational soccer and also with the heavier weight-lifting exercises he does at his gym. Mr. Akbari believes that he cannot lift as much weight now, especially in a "squat" position, as he did before the accident.
87  The defendant submits that the appropriate range for an award of non-pecuniary damages is <damage type = "other">$2,500</damage> to <damage type = "other">$3,000</damage>. The plaintiff is seeking an award of <damage type = "other">$25,000</damage>.
88  The defendant cited Seto v. Ng, ; and Gill v. Mansour,  in support of its suggested range of damages. The plaintiff relies on Lehtonen v. Marasco, ; Laxdal v. Robbins, ; Shen v. Buchanan, ; and Claydon v. ICBC, . The period of recovery in the cases cited by the plaintiff was considerably longer than the eight to 10-week period in this case, as described by Dr. Rai; or even the five months preceding Mr. Akbari's last visit to Dr. Rai, as described in the medical report.
89  The award in Seto v. Ng, cited above, appears low and the learned Provincial Court Judge did not refer to any authorities establishing the appropriate range. Justice Ehrcke found in Gill v. Mansour, cited above, that the plaintiff was essentially recovered in six weeks and that the plaintiff had exaggerated his symptoms during a holiday taken after the accident.
90  I award the plaintiff the sum of <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$12,000</damage> for non-pecuniary damages.
SUMMARY OF DAMAGES
91  I award the plaintiff the following damages:
 Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$12,000</damage> 
 Past Loss of Income: <damage type = "past wage loss">$1,237</damage> 
 Special Damages: <damage type = "special">$385</damage> 
COSTS
92  I am not aware of any reason why the plaintiff should not have his costs of this action, on Scale B. If there are matters that should be drawn to the Court's attention relevant to costs, such as pre-trial offers of settlement, the parties may make submissions in writing, or, if both counsel agree, may arrange with the Registry to attend to make oral submissions. Written submissions should be delivered no later than January 31, 2013. If the parties agree to make oral submissions, they should arrange with Trial Scheduling to appear before me. The appearance need not be before January 31, 2013, but the arrangements to appear should be made before that date.
W.G. BAKER J.
End of Document
Lumanlan v. Sadler, [2008] B.C.J. No. 2184
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
M.A. Humphries J.
Heard: October 20-24 and 27, 2008.
Judgment: November 13, 2008.
Docket: M064654
Registry: Vancouver
[2008] B.C.J. No. 2184   |      |
Between Maria Katrina Lumanlan, Plaintiff, and Quinn Paul Sadler, Defendant, and Insurance Corporation of British Columbia, Third Party
(64 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Arm injuries — Hand — Considerations impacting on award — Age of claimant — Contributory negligence — Damages for person who sustained serious hand injury in motor vehicle accident assessed at $50,000 for non-pecuniary damages, $3,000 for lost income, $50,000 for future loss of income, $5,000 for future care and $500 for special damages — Hand left disfigured and weak after seven surgeries — No reduction for failure to mitigate, as no evidence eighth surgery would have improved hand — Plaintiff worked inconsistently before accident, but was young, so her hand could have impact on future employment — Could use physiotherapy or helpful appliances in future — Lost personal items in accident — Damages reduced by 25 percent for contributory negligence for taking ride from drunk person.
Damages — Types of damages — For personal injuries — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Retroactive loss of income — Special damages — Non-pecuniary loss — Pain and suffering — Damages for person who sustained serious hand injury in motor vehicle accident assessed at <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$50,000</damage> for non-pecuniary damages, <damage type = "past wage loss">$3,000</damage> for lost income, <damage type = "future wage loss">$50,000</damage> for future loss of income, <damage type = "future care">$5,000</damage> for future care and <damage type = "special">$500</damage> for special damages — Hand left disfigured and weak after seven surgeries — No reduction for failure to mitigate, as no evidence eighth surgery would have improved hand — Plaintiff worked inconsistently before accident, but was young, so her hand could have impact on future employment — Could use physiotherapy or helpful appliances in future — Lost personal items in accident — Damages reduced by 25 percent for contributory negligence for taking ride from drunk person.
Tort law — Negligence — Duty and standard of care — Intoxicated persons — Contributory negligence — Apportionment of liability — Plaintiff's knowledge of danger — Intoxication — Motor vehicles — Passengers — Action by passenger injured when motor vehicle flipped while drunk driver doing donuts in parking lot allowed — Damages reduced by 25 percent to reflect contributory negligence on part of passenger, who should have foreseen she was placing herself at risk accepting ride from someone who was clearly drunk — Driver's conduct was more of a marked departure from applicable standard of care so he was 75 percent liable.
Action by Lumanlan against Sadler for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident. Sadler was driving, and Lumanlan was a passenger, when the motor vehicle flipped over. Sadler pleaded guilty to dangerous driving causing bodily harm and received a conditional sentence. Liability was admitted but Sadler claimed Lumanlan was contributorily negligence for accepting a ride with someone who was clearly drunk. Lumanlan and Sadler had just met the night of the accident in a pub. Lumanlan claimed both were drunk when they left together, but that she was more drunk. She admitted both staggered as they walked to Sadler's vehicle. The accident occurred as Sadler was driving donuts in the parking lot. Lumanlan did not recall if she was wearing her seat belt, although ambulance and hospital workers indicated she was not. She was extracted from the vehicle through the driver's side window by Sadler and a passerby. Sadler was arrested at eh scene for impaired driving and was later found to have a blood alcohol level far in excess of the legal limit. Lumanlan, who was right-handed, sustained serious injuries to her left hand resulting in seven surgeries. The experts disagreed on whether or not she was likely to develop arthritis. She was no longer able to play guitar of piano, and some day-to-day tasks like driving and doing dishes were difficult. She cancelled a planned eighth surgery which was intended to improve the appearance and function of the hand. She was left with some other scars and was self-conscious about them. He family doctor gave the opinion she was severely emotionally impacted by the accident, but offered no evidence to support this. Lumanlan did not mention a severe emotional impact, and although she was depressed and anxious in cars and planes, she was not interested in medication or counselling. Lumanlan was a 27-year-old who had not complete high school. She worked as a front desk clerk at a lodge. She had a daughter who was being raised by Lumanlan's mother. Her employment both before and after the accident had been inconsistent. She was disabled from working for 19 months after the accident. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 Lumanlan's daily life was not extensively affected by her injuries. Non-pecuniary damages were assessed at <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$50,000</damage>. A reduction for failure to mitigate was not appropriate, as it was not clear if the eighth surgery would have improved the appearance or function of her hand. It was not clear that Lumanlan would have done better working but for the accident, given her history of drifting from job to job. She was awarded <damage type = "past wage loss">$3,000</damage> for loss of income from the date of the accident to the date she first started working again. She was awarded <damage type = "future wage loss">$50,000</damage> for lost earning capacity, because she was young and could be limited because of the weakness in her hand in some future career. She was awarded <damage type = "future care">$5,000</damage> for future care costs, to provide her with some funds to use for helpful home appliances or physiotherapy in the future. Special damages of <damage type = "special">$500</damage> compensated her for a jacket, IPod and watch she lost in the accident. Lumanlan was found 25 percent contributorily negligent, because she should have foreseen that a drunk driver could put her in a position of danger. Sadler's departure from the applicable standard of care was much greater than Lumanlan's.
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: C. McTavish.
Counsel for the Defendants: No appearance.
Counsel for the Third Party: N. Wilhelm-Morden and G.S. Hoff.
[Editor's note: A corrigendum was released by the Court January 19, 2009; the correction has been made and the corrigendum is appended to this document.]
Reasons for Judgment
M.A. HUMPHRIES J.
Introduction
1  The plaintiff sues for damages for injuries sustained as a passenger in a motor vehicle which flipped over onto its roof while being driving by the defendant Quinn Paul Sadler on September 10, 2006. The defendant pled guilty on April 24, 2008 to dangerous driving causing bodily harm and received a conditional sentence. He did not appear at the trial and took no part in the proceedings. The defence was conducted by the third party, ICBC.
2  Liability is admitted with the qualification that the third party raises an issue of contributory negligence. It claims that the plaintiff did not take reasonable care for her safety by accepting a ride with a person who was obviously drunk.
Background: The Accident
3  The plaintiff was working as a front desk clerk at Blackcomb Lodge in Whistler, B.C. at the time of the accident. She went to a pub after work with some friends. The plaintiff had four drinks of hard liquor while at the pub. Her attention was drawn to the defendant, whom she did not know, who was sitting at a nearby table sharing a pitcher of beer with a friend.
4  The plaintiff and the defendant left the pub to go to another bar. The plaintiff noticed that the defendant was laughing loudly and yelling. She agreed on cross-examination that she took this to be an indication that he was feeling the alcohol he had consumed. Once at the bar, the plaintiff and defendant each had four or five drinks; the last one was a shooter. The bar closed at 2:00 a.m., and patrons had to leave by 2:30 a.m.
5  The plaintiff said they were both drunk when they left the bar, but she was drunker than the defendant was.
6  Outside the bar, they had a cigarette, and discussed how the plaintiff would get to the staff housing where she lived, at the top of Glacier Drive at the Base 2 parking lot. She had no money for a cab and did not want to walk in the dark. She assumed it was too late for buses.
7  The plaintiff testified she either asked the defendant for a ride, or he offered one. They walked to the parking lot, a five or ten minute walk. The plaintiff testified she was staggering as she walked. She said the defendant was also staggering, and agreed it was partly from helping her and partly from the effects of the alcohol.
8  The plaintiff did not recall the drive to the Base 2 parking lot. She thought the accident occurred in the parking lot where the truck was parked. However, it is clear that the defendant drove the plaintiff to the Base 2 parking lot.
9  The evidence surrounding the actual accident is very vague. The plaintiff recalls the defendant saying "check this out!" and beginning to spin doughnuts in the parking lot. All the plaintiff remembers is holding onto the window and screaming. The truck flipped over onto its roof, which was completely crushed.
10  Another worker who was going home from his shift testified that he heard the truck engine revving, and waited behind a parked bus because he was aware that people often drove foolishly in the parking lot. He then heard the crash. He ran out, saw the defendant getting out of the truck, and assisted him in getting the plaintiff out. From the pictures of the vehicle, it appears that the only area in which it was possible to get out of the cab was through what remained of the driver's window. The witness yelled to some friends to call 911.
11  The plaintiff does not recall if she had her seat belt on. From the consistent information given to the ambulance attendant, and later to the hospital workers, it appears that she did not. The witness who assisted in getting her out of the truck did not mention having to detach the seat belt. I find it to be more probable than not that she did not have it on, but the issue is not of great significance. The third party does not allege that the failure to wear a seatbelt contributed to the plaintiff's injuries, but it does say it is further evidence of her failure to take reasonable care for her own safety.
12  Cst. McMillan was called out at 3:05 a.m. and attended the scene two or three minutes later. He noted the defendant to be swaying, slurring his speech, red-eyed, and presenting a strong odour of liquor. Cst. McMillan testified that he formed his grounds for arrest, and took the defendant to the police station. Once at the station, and after the appropriate observation period, readings were obtained of .120 milligrams of alcohol in 100 millilitres of blood at 4:42 a.m.
13  Mr. Shajani, a blood alcohol technician, calculated the amount of blood alcohol back to the time of the accident at 3:00 a.m. to be .146. An issue arose as to the validity of that number because of the failure of the third party to establish when the defendant had had his last drink, having relied only on the hearsay statements of the defendant to Cst. McMillan. As counsel for the third party pointed out in argument, however, all that was necessary for Mr. Shajani to calculate accurately the blood alcohol level at the time of the accident was for the defendant not to have had a drink in the half hour prior to 3:00 a.m., and given the time frames described by the plaintiff, that would be extremely unlikely.
14  What is more important however, is whether the plaintiff knew the defendant was under the influence of alcohol to the extent of being impaired, and it is obvious from her evidence that she did.
Contributory Negligence
15  The essential consideration on the issue of contributory negligence is whether the plaintiff took reasonable care for her safety by agreeing to become a passenger in a car driven by a person she knew to be intoxicated. There are many cases that stand for the proposition that contributory negligence is established when a person becomes the willing passenger of a drunk driver, and the proportions of fault vary with the circumstances. See: Earnshaw v. Despins  (C.A.); Nielson v. Brunet Estate (Public Trustee of) , ; Shaw v. Storey  (C.A.); Mushta v. Best,  (S.C.); Neufeld v. Foster,  (S.C.).
16  The third party submits that the plaintiff should be found 40% contributorily negligent. The plaintiff says she should not be found contributorily negligent because she did not have an appreciation of the defendant's ability to drive before she got into the truck and she had no opportunity to get out of the vehicle once she realized he was driving unsafely. See: Reekie v. Messervey  (S.C.), aff'd ,  (C.A.).
17  In this case, the evidence establishes that the plaintiff must indeed assume some of the responsibility for her injuries. The plaintiff knew the defendant was drunk before she got into the truck. Although she was so drunk she was staggering and she does not recall the drive to the parking lot, she does recall the defendant's behaviour and testified that she knew he was drunk when they left the bar. She needed a ride home and either asked him for one or voluntarily accepted one from him.
18  However, fault must be apportioned on the basis of the nature and extent of the departure from the respective standards of care: Cempel v. Harrison Hot Springs Hotel Ltd. ,  at para. 24. On that basis, much more of the fault belongs to the defendant. He was clearly negligent. Not only was he impaired, but he chose to spin doughnuts, causing the truck to flip over. He had apparently driven without incident to the parking lot, and it was his decision to drive, while impaired, in such a dangerous fashion in the lot itself that led to the accident. While his behaviour was fuelled by alcohol, and the plaintiff should have foreseen that a drunk driver could put her in a position of danger, she was exposed to a greater degree of danger by his reckless antics. His departure from the applicable standard of care was much greater than the plaintiff's. I find the appropriate percentage of contributory negligence in all these circumstances to be 25%.
Injuries
19  The plaintiff was unemotional on the stand and appeared almost uninvolved in her testimony. She was pleasant but without affect, and although she answered the questions put to her in a straightforward manner, she did not seem to be interested in conveying any details or a sense of the impact of this accident on her life. Whether this is the effect of her pre-existing and ongoing depression, or whether she is simply stoic and accepting, the court is left mainly with the reports of her surgeon and the third party's expert, as well as the work capacity evaluator's results, in order to understand the effects of her injuries.
20  The plaintiff, who is right-handed, suffered serious injuries to her left hand. All the skin was removed from the back of her hand, and the tendons were exposed. Her middle finger was fractured.
21  She has had seven surgeries, during which the tendons have been repaired, the middle joint of the third finger has been fused, and a graft of skin from the inside of her thigh has been applied to the back of her hand. This skin graft was quite thick and has been reduced in stages.
22  The plaintiff does not have pain or numbness in her hand, but has stiffness in the metacarpal phalangeal joints - that is, the joints that connect the finger to the hand itself - on her index, middle and ring fingers, with pronounced stiffness in the middle joint of her index finger. The fusing of the middle joint of her third finger means it will not bend. She has signs of early osteoarthritis in the middle and ring fingers. Her micro-surgeon/hand specialist, Dr. Hill, is of the opinion that she has the potential to develop arthritis in all the joints of her left hand. The third party's specialist, Dr. Gropper, does not share that latter view, but apart from that his opinions did not differ from Dr. Hill's. Arthritis could raise the possibility of joint replacement in the future, but the doctors did little more than mention this without elaboration.
23  The plaintiff has weakened grip strength and some reduction in her tolerance for use of her left hand while doing various household chores like laundry and dishes. She said her hand becomes tired and painful after about three hours of the housekeeping tasks that comprise part of her present employment. Her left hand gets weak and tired quickly when she is driving. Her fused middle finger gets caught on things. She testified that she can no longer play the guitar and finds playing the piano difficult. No evidence was led to as to how well or often she played either of these instruments before the accident, or whether this loss impacts her in any significant way.
24  At present, the plaintiff has scarring on her wrists and fingers, a hand different in texture and function than the other, and a long thin scar on her inner thigh from the graft procedure. She also has small scars on her elbows and on her right knee. The back of her hand is still somewhat puffy and smooth. She wears a sleeve over it to forestall questions, as the difference in its appearance is noticeable and she imagines that people will stare at it.
25  The plaintiff's family doctor did not add anything of substance to the reports of the specialists, and in any event, I did not find his general comments to be helpful. He had not seen the plaintiff for some months when he wrote his report and she had had surgery in the interim. He did not mention any of her past medical history with drugs, alcohol or depression, even though he had treated her for them, describing her as "an active, healthy and confident individual with no previous physical impairment" and "no previous medical concerns." He opined that the accident had had a severe emotional impact on the plaintiff, but nothing of the sort appears in any of his notes. He testified that he relied on his general knowledge of the family, and of course one would expect some emotional disruption from such an accident and seven surgeries, but there is no support for the notion that the accident had a severe emotional impact on the plaintiff.
26  The plaintiff herself did not mention a severe emotional impact from the accident. She did mention that she became depressed immediately after the accident and is still anxious in cars and planes. However, she has decided not to take medication or to go for counselling.
27  A further operation to improve the appearance of the hand, which Dr. Hill said may result in a small improvement in function as well, was scheduled in June of <damage type = "other">2008</damage>, but the plaintiff cancelled it. It appears that she may have plans to reschedule it in the future, but the third party contends that insofar as damages are awarded based on any current compromised appearance or function of the hand, they should be reduced by 10% for failure to mitigate.
Non-Pecuniary Damages
28  Both counsel advised the court that cases dealing only with hand injuries are not plentiful, but each was able to provide some assistance. The plaintiff relied on Star v. Ellis,  (<damage type = "other">$55,000</damage> for injury to wrist and hand, with a fracture to a joint which was "not very debilitating) which in turn referred to Lowe v. Larue (<damage type = "other">1998</damage>), ,  (<damage type = "other">$65,000</damage>, for hand and wrist injury with psychological and emotional impact, adjusted for inflation to <damage type = "other">$80,000</damage>). The plaintiff seeks non-pecuniary damages in the range of <damage type = "other">$80,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$95,000</damage>.
29  The third party refers to Narayan (Guardian ad litem of) v. Djurickovic,  (amputation of ring and middle fingers, with skin grafts and weakened grip strength, <damage type = "other">$33,000</damage>); Jahangiri-Bojani v. Brudderer,  (partial amputation, four surgeries, permanent impairment of two fingers on non-dominant hand, <damage type = "other">$27,000</damage>); Wright v. Wright  (N.B.Q.B.) (right forearm and part of right hand damaged, three surgeries, scarring, limitations in sensation and movement and loss of grip strength, <damage type = "other">$56,000</damage> adjusted for inflation); Wilcot (litigation guardian of) v. Ellis, , . (a plaintiff who was described as extremely left-hand dominant suffered restricted range of motion in left wrist and all fingers of left hand and reduced grip strength; $55,000). The Third Party submits that an appropriate award of non-pecuniary damages would be <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage>.
30  In summary, as a result of the accident, the plaintiff was required to have seven surgeries on her left hand. She is left with a non-dominant hand that is obviously different in appearance and function, regardless of the remaining surgery that will give some further amelioration in those respects. She is left with stiffness in three fingers, one of them fused, but does not suffer pain or numbness. She keeps her hand covered to avoid embarrassment. She has scarring, reduced grip strength, and reduced tolerance for repetitive activities involving her left hand.
31  Based on the evidence before the court, the effect on her daily life and activities is not extensive. She finds some household chores difficult, and her left hand becomes tired when driving. She does face the prospect of advancing arthritis, particularly in the two presently affected joints.
32  Considering all of the evidence, I am of the view that the amount proposed by the third party is reasonable. I award <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$50,000</damage> for non-pecuniary damages.
33  In respect of the claim for failure to mitigate, I am unable to say that the amount of the award would differ if Ms. Lumanlan had gone through the eighth surgery. While that surgery is expected to improve the appearance and perhaps the function of her hand in some small measure, the inconvenience and effect on her life of both a further medical procedure and the time necessary to recover from it would offset any small amount by which the award might be reduced.
Work History: Loss of Income
34  The plaintiff is 27. She did not complete Grade 12. She has a child who is being raised by her mother in her home town in the north of the province. The plaintiff presently works in her hometown as a front desk clerk and housekeeper at a local lodge. She lives with her parents.
35  After leaving school in 2000, the plaintiff worked for a short time in 2001 at a hotel in Whistler as a part-time housekeeper. She quit that job as she found it physically demanding and the pay was not good. In the intervening period before her next job, her child was born. Her next job was in 2004 as a cashier at A & W, and lasted less than a month. Her next job was in 2006. This was a front desk clerk job which she left after a month when she was told the hotel was not going to keep her on because she was missing too much work.
36  The plaintiff began the front desk job at Blackcomb at the end of August, 2006, and held it until the accident occurred shortly thereafter in September of 2006. She was earning <damage type = "other">$12.50</damage> an hour during the three month probationary period, and would have received <damage type = "other">$13.50</damage> an hour once completed the probation.
37  The plaintiff moved back and forth between her home town and Vancouver during the two years after the accident, while having her surgeries and undergoing physiotherapy.
38  Her next job was at another hotel in Vancouver which began in April of 2008. She was paid <damage type = "other">$13.00</damage> an hour and the job had the potential for advancement. This job only lasted a few weeks, and she was given the choice to leave or be fired. She left. Her supervisor testified that she was unreliable, missed too much work, and she would not hire her again. However, she said the plaintiff's hand had no bearing on her employability, as she could do the required keyboard work with no problems.
39  The plaintiff is now working in her home town at a similar job in a lodge, earning <damage type = "other">$8.00</damage> an hour.
40  While off work, the plaintiff collected social assistance payments of between <damage type = "other">$3,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$6,000</damage> a year. Her employment income for all of these years was a little over <damage type = "other">$300.00</damage>. In 2007, she received <damage type = "other">$14,500</damage> from social assistance.
41  Dr. Hill, who performed the surgeries on Ms. Lumanlan's hand, said she was disabled as a result of her injuries until early 2008, and I accept that evidence. The plaintiff first obtained employment after the accident in April 2008. The plaintiff claims past loss of income for that 19 month period, based on the rate of pay she had been receiving at the time of the accident. Counsel calculates this to be a gross amount of <damage type = "other">$45,630</damage>, subject to a calculation for net loss, and subject to a deduction for disability and social assistance benefits.
42  The manager of the hotel in Whistler, who did not supervise the plaintiff directly, said there were no plans to lay her off. He said there was an oversupply of jobs in Whistler at that time, and an undersupply of employees. He agreed she had done few, if any, shifts on her own during her short period of employment, and there would have been no assessment of her until the end of the three month probation period. He agreed that reliability is important to maintaining a job.
43  The third party takes the position that it is unlikely that the plaintiff would have continued to work at Blackcomb for the period of disability. She had only had three jobs since leaving high school and had worked only one month per job. The plaintiff told several medical professionals after the accident that she was a binge drinker and her bingeing had increased since moving to Whistler. The third party takes the position that based on those circumstances, it is unlikely that the plaintiff would have worked more than a month. Her wage loss should therefore be about <damage type = "other">$960</damage>.
44  The plaintiff has not established a realistic possibility that she would have continued in her job at Blackcomb, made it through her probation and worked steadily in the next two years. There is simply no basis upon which to conclude that she would have made anything near the <damage type = "other">$45,000</damage> projected by her counsel.
45  On the other hand, it is not entirely fair to judge her by her work record as a teenager, and also to fail to account for the fact that she had a child in the early 2000's. Her actually work record, in those circumstances, may not be a fair reflection of her capabilities but for the accident. Her work record since the accident has not been any better, but to some extent this is explained by having to cope with seven surgeries and related physiotherapy.
46  Taking all of this into account, however, there is almost no evidence upon which to base a conclusion that the plaintiff would have done much more than she had done in the past and than she has done since the accident - drift from job to job for short periods of time. It appears that the plaintiff had no difficulty obtaining employment; her problem was in maintaining a job. It is distinctly possible, even probable, that she would have had several short term jobs during the relevant period.
47  In the circumstances of this case, such an award can be nothing more than a rough assessment. I award <damage type = "past wage loss">$3,000</damage> for loss of income from the date of the accident to the date of her first employment, April 2008. I leave the issue of deductions to counsel, with liberty to apply if necessary.
Loss of Future Earning Capacity
48  For similar reasons, it is not profitable to embark on a calculation-based assessment of future loss, although her counsel produced an expert who provided various scenarios and present value tables, which counsel submitted supported an award in the range of <damage type = "other">$120,000</damage>, based on the assumption that the plaintiff is unable, as a result of the injury, to become a licensed practical nurse.
49  The third party submits that an award of <damage type = "other">$20,000</damage> would be appropriate, given all the negative contingencies that exist in respect of the plaintiff's future employment prospects, including her evidence that she wishes to have more children and would take time away from work to do so. The third party also refers to the evidence from the plaintiff's family doctor that he twice sent forms to government agencies supporting the plaintiff's inability to work due to depression, unconnected to the accident.
50  The plaintiff said she would like to have a higher paying job than she has now, and is interested in fashion merchandising. She has audited a couple of related courses. She said she did not think her hand would interfere with employment in that field. She also testified to some vague plans to become a licensed practical nurse, but said she assumes she could no longer pursue such a career, although she said no one has told her so.
51  The plaintiff is able to do the work she was doing at the time of the accident without restriction, that of front desk clerk. She obtained jobs at two different hotels since the accident and was let go from both because of her unreliability, not because of any restrictions resulting from the accident. She currently holds a front desk/housekeeping position in her home town. She experiences pain in her hand after three hours of housekeeping work. She said she is able to do data entry for twenty minutes at a time. Dr. Hill is of the view that the plaintiff's loss of dexterity will affect her ability to keyboard at an optimal level.
52  Although her former employer from Blackcomb said he would prefer, having seen the plaintiff's hand, to hire someone without an injured hand, her employer from a more recent job said it would have had no impact whatsoever as long as she could do the job. Obviously the latter position is the only tenable one in today's labour world where discrimination based on appearance is not tolerated. However, that evidence is some indication of the hidden restrictions to employability that the plaintiff may face.
53  According to the work capacity evaluator, who did only a brief screening test rather than a full evaluation, forceful gripping and repetitive handling led to some limits of tolerance. He noted over time the plaintiff became slower and needed breaks, or would shift to her right hand. She would have difficulty with jobs that required use of both hands for extended periods, but he agreed there are not too many jobs for women in that category, other than employment that requires continual keyboarding. He did not specifically test her in respect of limitations to becoming a licensed practical nurse.
54  The plaintiff's future plans are vague, and in my view, the accident has not affected that lack of direction one way or another. Despite leaving school in 2000, the plaintiff has not even taken the first step of completing her high school. I am not persuaded that she has established a real and substantial possibility that she would pursue any particular career path.
55  However, she is young, and could be expected to try to advance in some sort of career or employment field at some point, including ones that require two strong and dextrous hands. Her opportunities are limited to some extent because of the weakness in her left hand, and for someone of her limited education, the loss of a strong left hand could be significant. This loss may become more significant if her arthritis advances, and whether or not she faces the possibility of arthritis in all the joints of her left hand, with or without consequent joint replacement, both hand experts agree she already has signs of arthritis in two joints.
56  She therefore meets the tests in Brown v. Golaiy  (S.C.): she is less capable of earning income from all types of employment, less valuable to herself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market, and less able to take advantage of all job opportunities that might otherwise have been open to her.
57  Considering all the factors, including negative contingencies, I assess the impairment of the plaintiff's capital asset of her employability at <damage type = "future wage loss">$50,000</damage>.
Cost of Future Care
58  The plaintiff provided calculations for the cost of obtaining various things at various future intervals as recommended by her work capacity evaluator and the doctors: exercise equipment, physiotherapy, various consultations, homemaking services, yard maintenance, appliances, and medications. Depending on the exact requirements and their frequency, the costs as set out in the tables range from <damage type = "other">$74,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$87,000</damage>.
59  Dr. Gropper recommended motion exercises monitored by a physiotherapist.
60  The plaintiff is able to take care of her personal grooming and to look after her child without problems, although her mother is the primary caregiver. She is able to do her own housework. The plaintiff is staying in her parents' house at present but has an apartment in Vancouver. The work capacity evaluator said she might require some assistance with house and yard work, if she should ever move into a house, although he did not specifically test her tolerance for using long-handled tools.
61  The third party points out that the plaintiff is not undergoing any treatment. She is not taking any medications. She has not received any counselling. She has not had to hire any housekeeping assistance. In fact, her present job involves housekeeping. She has not purchased any of the suggested appliances or said she needs them. There is no evidence to suggest she is contemplating any of these things or feels the lack of them.
62  Given the lack of evidence upon which to reach a conclusion respecting the possibility of any of the suggested services being reasonably required or used, I accept the position advanced by the third party that an assessment is appropriate, rather than a meticulous consideration of each item and its place and frequency in the tables. The requirement for exercise and physiotherapy is reasonable, and this must take into account the possibility of arthritis increasing in the future. That could well necessitate the need for some help around the home and the requirement in future for some of the helpful appliances. I assess the cost of future care at <damage type = "future care">$5,000</damage>.
Special Damages
63  The plaintiff lost a jacket, an IPod, and a wrist watch in the accident. She seeks compensation of <damage type = "special">$500</damage> for these items, and the Third Party agrees that amount is reasonable. It is so ordered.
Result
1.  Contributory negligence 25% 
No reduction for failure to mitigate
2.  Non-pecuniary damages <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$50,000</damage> 
3.  Past Wage Loss <damage type = "past wage loss">$3,000</damage> 
4.  Loss of Earning Capacity <damage type = "future wage loss">$50,000</damage> 
5.  Cost of Future Care <damage type = "future care">$5,000</damage> 
6.  Special Damages <damage type = "special">$500</damage> 
Costs
64  Unless there is a reason to speak to costs, the plaintiff will have her costs at Scale B.
M.A. HUMPHRIES J.
* * * * *
Corrigendum
Released: January 19, 2009
Revised Judgment
Corrigendum to the Reasons for Judgment issued advising that the last sentence in paragraph 26 will now read:
"However, she has decided not to take medication or to go for counselling."
End of Document
Gregorowicz (Litigation guardian of) v. Lee, [2010] B.C.J. No. 636
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
New Westminster, British Columbia
L.P. Williamson J.
Heard: March 31 and April 1, 2010.
Judgment: April 9, 2010.
Docket: S072621
Registry: New Westminster
[2010] B.C.J. No. 636   |   2010 BCSC 478   |   188 A.C.W.S. (3d) 595   |   2010 CarswellBC 856
Between Patrick Peter Gregorowicz, an infant by his Litigation Guardian, Peter Gregorowicz, Plaintiff, and James Lee, Defendant
(35 paras.)
Case Summary
Tort law — Negligence — Causation — Contributory negligence — Contributory negligence of parent or child — Action by Gregorowicz for damages suffered in a skiing accident allowed — Gregorowicz, who was just under five years old, was skiing with his father when he was struck by Lee, who was snowboarding — Gregorowicz suffered a spiral fracture of his right tibia and fibula — Lee was either not paying attention or going too fast — 25 per cent of damages apportioned to father — General damages of <damage type = "general">$30,000 awarded</damage>.
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Leg injuries — Fractures — Action by Gregorowicz for damages suffered in a skiing accident allowed — Gregorowicz, who was just under five years old, was skiing with his father when he was struck by Lee, who was snowboarding — Gregorowicz suffered a spiral fracture of his right tibia and fibula — Lee was either not paying attention or going too fast — 25 per cent of damages apportioned to father — General damages of $30,000 awarded.
Action by Gregorowicz for damages suffered in a skiing accident. Gregorowicz was just under five years old at the time of the accident. He was skiing with his father. He had skied before and was a few meters behind his father when he was struck by Lee, who was snowboarding at the time. Lee was 18 at the time and had been snowboarding for four years. Gregorowicz suffered a spiral fracture of his right tibia and fibula. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 Lee was liable for the accident. Lee was either going too fast or not paying proper attention. An infant under the age of five could not be found contributorily negligent. 25 per cent of the damages were apportioned to the father. Gregorowicz had completely recovered from his injuries. Gregorowicz was awarded general damages of <damage type = "general">$30,000</damage>.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Negligence Act,
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: C.A. Campbell.
Counsel for the Defendant: C.L. Smith.
Reasons for Judgment
L.P. WILLIAMSON J.
1   This proceeding concerns an accident which took place between the infant plaintiff, a skier, and the defendant, a snowboarder, on Grouse Mountain, near Vancouver, on February 9, 2002.
2  The plaintiff was five weeks short of five years of age at the time of the accident. He was skiing with his father. He had been skiing a number of times and according to the evidence had advanced to the stage where he was able to snowplough on his own. His father testified that he was skiing a few meters ahead of his son, within "voice distance", so that he was able to choose a safe route. He testified that he repeatedly looked over his shoulder to make sure that the infant plaintiff was alright.
3  The defendant was 18 years old at the time. He had been snowboarding for about four years. He testified that he had been on Grouse Mountain many times and by the date of the accident was familiar with its runs.
4  On the day in question, the plaintiff and his father went to Grouse Mountain and reached the top of the run popularly known as "the Cut" somewhere around 5:00 p.m. The run was well lit. The father testified that the Cut is a very wide run with unobstructed views, so he considered it a good choice for skiing with his son.
5  He testified that they skied slowly down the run, traversing back and forth. At one point, closer to the bottom, he noticed a number of snow fences towards the left side of the Cut. They appeared to him to be lining a sort of funnel. Rather than go through that funnel, because he was not sure what was at the bottom of it, he skied around the fenced area. They then turned to traverse back across the Cut.
6  The father testified that at this point the fences were above him. He saw a number of people skiing or snowboarding but believed there was nobody close to them.
7  He testified that they passed over a slightly steeper area and he looked back. He said that his son was still behind him snowploughing. He looked ahead and then heard a scream. He turned and saw what he described as a "tumbling snowball". He then realized that his son had been in a collision.
8  He described what he thought was the point of the collision as 10 to 20 meters below the fences in an area where the run dipped.
9  The father removed his skis and ran over to where the infant plaintiff was lying in the snow. The other person, the father testified, was "gathering himself up". The father described the infant plaintiff as looking pale. He first thought he was in shock, but became aware that he had injured his leg. In fact, the infant plaintiff had sustained a spiral fracture of the right tibia, and a fracture of the right fibula.
10  The defendant was still there and the father asked him to remain. He did so.
11  Ski patrol arrived quickly. Eventually, the infant plaintiff was taken down the hill to an ambulance and to the hospital.
12  The defendant testified. He said that he had gone to Grouse Mountain around 1:00 p.m. that afternoon to meet a number of friends. Sometime during the late afternoon, he fell, hit his head on the ground, and as a result of the impact, bit his tongue. At that point he did not feel well. He went to a restaurant on the hill to get some food and after eating, he decided to rest for some time.
13  He said that when he returned to the run he started off with a friend on skis who was much more competent, trying to go extremely fast. However, he testified that when he tried to go fast, "carving" was the word he used, he found that his leg began shaking. As a result he made the decision to let his friend go on down the hill while he continued on much more slowly.
14  He testified that he was then traveling relatively slowly down the Cut in a wide s-curve pattern. He testified that just before the collision he saw no one in front of him. But as he was turning to his right he felt something hit him on the back of his right hip.
15  He looked down and saw a ski between his legs. Whatever was at his hip he tried to push away but he then tumbled down the hill. Only when he came to a stop did he realize that what had, as he put it, hit him was a young boy.
16  The young boy was of course the infant plaintiff. The defendant removed his snowboard and went over the boy, brushed the snow off his face, and asked him if he was okay. He said that the boy was crying.
17  At that point, another skier went close by spraying them with snow. In order to make sure that no one hit the child the defendant went up a few feet, and stuck his snowboard vertically in the snow to warn off other skiers. By this time, he testified, the boy's father had arrived.
18  He asked the father what he should do. When the father said that he should wait for the ski patrol, as noted above, he remained.
19  A second defence witness, Kim Woo Joong testified. He had been skiing with the defendant, but had eventually skied well ahead of him down to the bottom. He was standing there at the bottom and saw the defendant fall. As a result, he went into the gondola, rode to the top, and skied back down to where the plaintiff and the defendant were on the run. Unfortunately, although he had seen the defendant falling, he testified that he did not see what caused the defendant to fall. His testimony then was of little help.
Liability
20  I am satisfied that the defendant was liable for this accident. I find as a fact that the father was skiing with the infant plaintiff. I am satisfied that his tactic of skiing a few meters in front of his infant son was reasonable in the circumstances. The evidence was at that time the son was able to snowplough. The father went in front of him to choose the safest path. He testified that he frequently looked over his shoulder and was able to check on his son. I therefore reject the submission of the defendant that skiing ahead of a child is negligent.
21  Second, I look at the possible scenarios here. The first is that the defendant, snowboarding too fast, or not paying proper attention, collided with the infant plaintiff. Second, it is possible that the defendant cut the infant plaintiff off, and that the infant plaintiff was unable to stop in time and struck the defendant. The third possibility is that the infant plaintiff was in fact behind the defendant and due to inexperience was not able to stop before he struck him.
22  In the first two scenarios described, the defendant is liable. In the third, he is not. However, I reject the third scenario as an explanation.
23  First, I accept that the infant plaintiff was snowploughing and it is improbable that he would be going fast enough to hit the defendant from behind. Second, if the infant plaintiff was in fact behind the defendant, as the defendant testified, the defendant would have been able to see the infant plaintiff's father who was only meters directly ahead. Yet he testified that before the collision he saw no one. This leads me to conclude that he was either going too fast or, more likely, was not paying proper attention.
24  In the result, I find the defendant liable.
25  I note that the defendant pleaded contributory negligence. I am satisfied, however, that an infant plaintiff, under the age of five, could not be found to be contributorily negligent. In so finding, I have in mind the discussion in Hixon v. Roberts, , concerning whether a child of tender years can be found guilty of negligence.
26  The difficulty here, which has given me some pause, is that on these facts I conclude that it is the father who was contributorily negligent. It was his evidence that there was a dip in the ski run close to where the collision occurred. On the evidence I find that the dip was at the bottom of the funnel created by the snow fences. Indeed, the father expressed the opinion that he thought the defendant failed to see his son because his son was below the dip. I conclude it was negligent of the father to lead his son across the Cut so close to the dip that a person above it would not be able to see the child.
27  In the circumstances here, the father is not a party. The Negligence Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 333 states in s. 4 that where damage has been caused by the fault of two or more persons the court must determine the degree to which each person was at fault. But that section goes on to say that if two or more persons are found at fault, they are jointly and severally liable to the person sustaining the damage.
28  The person sustaining the damage is the infant plaintiff. I conclude an appropriate apportionment of damages is 75% to the defendant and 25% to the father.
Damages
29  The plaintiff has put forward two cases in which damages were awarded in the amount of $50,000. In Blake v. Buy-Low Foods Ltd., , the plaintiff fractured the tibia and fibula of her left leg, similar injuries to the case at bar. She was immobilized and in a cast for six weeks, and in a wheelchair for six more months. After a period on crutches, and using a walker, internal fixation devises which had been placed in her leg were removed in January 2001. However, at the time of trial, 18 months later, there were residual symptoms, and the learned trial judge found that her prognosis "is for residual symptoms and deformity on a permanent basis".
30  In Blow v. MacMillan, , the plaintiff also sustained a fractured right tibia and fibula. In addition, he sustained a mild close head injury, multiple facial lacerations, left pulmonary and liver contusions, and bruising. Some seven years later, a medical report stated that he "has reached maximum medical improvement concerning his injuries" and spoke of mild residual problems. These injuries were more serious than in the case at bar and the effects of those injuries lasted considerably longer.
31  The infant plaintiff in this case suffered a fracture to the tibia and the fibula. His leg was placed in a cast, and shortly thereafter the cast was removed to reset the bones. A second cast was removed in early April 2002. Thereafter, although he was reluctant to bear any weight on his leg, he improved quickly. By June 2002 he was active, although there was some limping, and a concern of leg length discrepancy. Later, doctors confirmed that there was no evidence of any length discrepancy. The infant plaintiff recovered completely and is now active in age appropriate activities, including sports. The medical evidence is that his injuries will not have any impact upon his future ability to work.
32  The defendant has referred the Court to the case of McGrath v. Meise, , a case arising from the plaintiff being sideswiped by a bus while riding her bicycle. Her leg was broken in the accident.
33  She was in a cast for several weeks, then used crutches and a wheelchair. Within five or six weeks, she was walking in a boot cast and commenced physiotherapy. For months after the accident, her physiotherapist reported that her gait looked normal; she had no pain, but still lacked full flexion. By February of 2005 she was fully recovered although she had some residual pain when skiing and playing tennis. The court awarded general damages of <damage type = "general">$30,000</damage>.
34  I consider McGrath closer to the circumstances of the case at bar. I award the infant plaintiff damages in the amount of <damage type = "total">$30,000</damage>.
35  The plaintiff will have his ordinary costs.
L.P. WILLIAMSON J.
End of Document
Dzumhur v. Davoody, [2015] B.C.J. No. 2730
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
N.P. Kent J.
Heard: October 13-16, November 19-20,
2015; written submissions of the
plaintiff, November 23, 2015; written submissions
of the defendant, November
25, 2015.
Judgment: December 10, 2015.
Docket: M143279
Registry: Vancouver
[2015] B.C.J. No. 2730   |
Between Amir Dzumhur, Plaintiff, and Fariba Davoody, Defendant
(260 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — For torts — Types of damages — General damages — Categories of --Loss of income — Employees — For personal injuries — Loss of earning capacity — Considerations — Extent of incapacity — Cost of future care — Action by Dzumhur for damages for personal injuries sustained in motor vehicle accident allowed — Dzumhur was awarded non-pecuniary general damages of $85,000, past income of $4,000, past loss of earning capacity of $12,200, loss of future earning capacity of $100,000, special damages of $2,087, and cost of future care of $26,500 — Dzumhur was not physically capable of full-time employment — But for accident, demise of Dzumhur's furniture delivery business meant he would have become full-time employee of UPS — Dzumhur's ability to engage in recreational activities such as skiing, bicycling and soccer was reduced — Court Order Interest Act.
Action by Dzumhur for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident. Davoody drove into the path of Dzumhur's oncoming vehicle and a collision ensued. Davoody acknowledged that she had been given a ticket by the police officers who attended the scene for failure to yield. In the accident, Dzumhur claimed he experienced injuries to his neck, right shoulder and chest, bruises on his left arm, pain in his lower and middle back, and pain in his right upper thigh and right foot. Dzumhur was working at UPS as a driver at the time of the accident. Dzumhur was off work for 30 working days from the date of the accident. Dzumhur claimed that lower back pain was present all the time, and that activity increased the pain. Dzumhur claimed that he could not perform at work to the same level that he did before the accident, and that when he returned to work, he lost his route to another full-time driver and that his work hours were reducing. Dzumhur's delivery business also petered out following the accident. Dzumhur's 2014 income was $55,000. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 Dzumhur was awarded non-pecuniary general damages of $85,000, past income of $4,000, past loss of earning capacity of $12,200, loss of future earning capacity of $100,000, special damages of $2,087, and cost of future care of $26,500. Davoody was entirely at fault for accident. Dzumhur presented as a plain-spoken, honest witness and his evidence was found to be credible. Dzumhur was not physically capable of full-time employment at UPS. Evidence indicated that his back pain would continue. Dzumhur's ability to engage in recreational activities such as skiing, bicycling and soccer was reduced but he was capable of engaging in them in so far as his tolerance of pain permitted. The ongoing pain and activity restrictions would continue to negatively impact his emotional health and mood. Evidence indicated that treatment would likely improve the joint-related low back pain, but was unlikely to impact the soft tissue-generated lower back pain. Dzumhur clearly lost some income from his delivery business as a result of the accident. But for the accident, the demise of Dzumhur's furniture delivery business meant he would have become a full-time employee of UPS in the spring of 2015. The loss of future earning capacity was assessed on the basis that Dzumhur would continue as a part-time driver for UPS. The pain and physical difficulties arising from Dzumhur's current medical condition continued to effectively prevent him from becoming a full-time employee. Dzumhur was fit, strong and healthy before the accident and he likely would have been capable of working as a UPS driver until age 65. The assessment of loss of future earning capacity was assessed on the basis that Dzumhur would continue as a part-time driver for UPS. However, a significant contingency was adopted to allow for the real and substantial possibility that future treatments would reduce his pain and related physical activity restrictions to such a degree as to allow for full-time work. A fair base figure to employ for an arithmetical "loss of earnings approach" to assessment in this case was $15,000 per annum. This reflected the difference between full-time work and continued work on a part-time basis at almost the same level of hours as before the accident.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Court Order Interest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 79,
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: Jeffrey K. Logan, Anoop S. Bains.
Counsel for the Defendant: Deepak Gautam.
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION
PLAINTIFF'S TESTIMONY
DEFENDANT'S TESTIMONY
LAY WITNESSES
James Trainor
Michael Westrand
Sayed Faizi
Salem Causevic
Alma Cunjalo
Darren McLennan
Karl Madsen
Gurch Khrod
Michael Tsitlenok
Artyom Rakhmatulin
Nihad Krupic
Jacqueline Stairs
MEDICAL/EXPERT WITNESSES
Dr. Lisa Caillier
Dr. Robin Rickards
Dr. Leslie Cohen
LIABILITY
CAUSATION AND THE ASSESSMENT OF DAMAGES IN A NEGLIGENCE CASE
CREDIBILITY OF THE PLAINTIFF
FINDINGS AS TO THE PLAINTIFF'S INJURY, DISABILITY AND THE CONTINGENCY OF
FUTURE MEDICAL TREATMENT
NON-PECUNIARY GENERAL DAMAGES
LOSS OF PAST AND FUTURE INCOME EARNING CAPACITY
Past income loss
Past loss of earning capacity
Future loss of earning capacity
SPECIAL DAMAGES
COST OF FUTURE CARE
SUMMARY
Reasons for Judgment
N.P. KENT J.
INTRODUCTION
1  This action claims damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident on June 1, 2012 at the intersection of No. 5 and Bath Roads in Richmond, B.C. At that time the plaintiff was driving his van northbound in the center lane on No. 5 Road when the defendant left the westbound stop sign at the T-intersection intending to make a left turn south onto No. 5 Road. The defendant drove into the path of the plaintiff's oncoming vehicle and a violent collision ensued.
2  Issues in dispute in this case include both liability and quantum of damages.
3  For the reasons that follow I find the defendant entirely at fault for the accident and I award damages to the plaintiff in the following amounts:
Non-pecuniary general damages: <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$85,000.00</damage> 
Past income loss (net): <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">4,000.00</damage> 
Past loss of earning capacity (net): <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">12,200.00</damage> 
Loss of future earning capacity: <damage type = "future wage loss">100,000.00</damage> 
Special damages: <damage type = "special">2,087.05</damage> 
Cost of future care: <damage type = "future care">26,500.00</damage> 
TOTAL: <damage type = "total">$229,787.05</damage> 
PLAINTIFF'S TESTIMONY
4  Mr. Dzumhur is 52 years old and came to Canada as a refugee from Croatia in 1994. He lived in Niagara Falls for four months but later in the year moved with his mother to Vancouver where his younger brother lived.
5  Mr. Dzumhur attended eight years of elementary school followed by four years of technical training in telecommunications. Before leaving Bosnia he was employed as a telephone systems operator.
6  In January 2006, Mr. Dzumhur applied for part-time work at the Bombay Company store. He worked in the stock room. He noticed a need for delivery services and asked if he might be able to do that work outside his company hours. His employer had no objection and started to steer delivery requests to Mr. Dzumhur.
7  In October 2006, Mr. Dzumhur joined UPS as a part-time driver. He continued with his delivery work for the Bombay Company notwithstanding the employment with UPS. He kept his own records respecting his deliveries and the amount of cash earned each year, which he did not declare on his income tax returns. In recent years the number of deliveries and income reflected in the plaintiff's records, which he testified as being accurate, were:
Year Number of Deliveries Income 
2010 139 $11,414.00 
2011 189 14,805.00 
2012 93 7,695.00 
2013 58 <damage type = "other">4,380.00</damage> 
2014 12 <damage type = "other">960.00</damage> 
(4 months)   
8  Mr. Dzumhur produced his income tax returns for the years 2008 to 2014 and they were marked as exhibits. In round numbers, his declared employment income over the following years was:
Year Income 
2008 $ 25,000.00 
2009 36,000.00 
2010 45,000.00 
2011 46,000.00 
2012 41,000.00 
2013 <damage type = "other">50,000.00</damage> 
2014 <damage type = "other">55,000.00</damage> 
9  Mr. Dzumhur's most recent pay stub for from UPS indicates he has earned approximately <damage type = "other">$37,000</damage> thus far in 2015.
10  On the day of the accident, Mr. Dzumhur had dropped his two children off at school and was on his way to work at the airport when the collision occurred at approximately 8:30 a.m. He was driving his Dodge Caravan north on No. 5 Road in the center of the two northbound lanes. He estimates he was travelling at the speed limit. A light rain had left the road surface wet.
11  No. 5 Road hosted a fair bit of traffic. A vehicle in the right lane ahead of him turned right to go east on Bath Road. The next thing Mr. Dzumhur saw was a car right in front of him coming across his lane. He had earlier noticed the car at the stop sign but did not actually see it leave the stop sign. He attempted to swerve to the left to avoid the car but was not able to. He says everything was "so fast" and "sudden".
12  Mr. Dzumhur's van came to rest on the left curb side of No. 5 Road. He got out of the vehicle feeling dizzy and disoriented. He went over to the other vehicle. It was driven by a woman but he can no longer recall the conversation he had with her.
13  The police later arrived and ticketed Mr. Dzumhur for speeding. He said he was surprised by the ticket and did not understand how the officer could give him a ticket without having seen the accident. The officer told him that the ticket was based on what the witnesses said had occurred.
14  Mr. Dzumhur disputed the ticket but he heard nothing further and no hearing has been held.
15  Mr. Dzumhur was able to identify both vehicles from photos taken after the accident. The photographs of his van were taken at the scene. The photographs of the defendant's vehicle were taken at a body shop. His own right front bumper and right front fender are damaged. The left front end of his vehicle sustained no damage.
16  The plaintiff's vehicle has extensive damage to the entire front end. The front bumper is detached; it is actually depicted in front of the plaintiff's vehicle photographed at the scene. The hood is crumpled.
17  Before this accident the plaintiff had not suffered any injuries nor experienced any major illness. He attended upon a doctor only rarely for things like the flu.
18  In the accident, the plaintiff says he suffered injuries to his right neck, right shoulder and chest, bruises on his left arm, pain in his lower and middle back, and pain in his right upper thigh and right foot. He did not go to work on the day of the accident. He went home with his father-in-law whom he called to pick him up. He did not return to work until mid-July 2012.
19  Following the accident, the plaintiff says he suffered from dizziness and nausea, pain in his neck and right shoulder, pain in his chest as he was wearing a seatbelt and the airbag was activated, bruises on his left arm, and pain in the right upper thigh and right foot. All of these symptoms resolved within a matter of months, however he continues to experience ongoing pain in his low back and, for a couple of years, pain in the right buttock radiating down the right leg. This was something he was told to be sciatica pain.
20  He was treated by his family doctor, Dr. Cohen, on a few occasions after the accident and again in the late summer of 2013 when he experienced severe pain and discomfort as a result of a long drive for the family's vacation in Osoyoos. Dr. Cohen initially prescribed physiotherapy as well as some medication; however, the plaintiff's impression was that the medication did not help much.
21  Following Dr. Caillier's recommendation in late 2013, the plaintiff underwent 36 therapy sessions with a kinesiologist who taught him various stretches and exercises designed to improve mobility and functionality. In the plaintiff's opinion, these sessions did not help very much with the low back pain; however, they did help to resolve the condition of pain radiating from the right buttock down the right leg. The latter now only seems to recur when he drives long distances.
22  The plaintiff thinks that the kinesiology sessions may have made the low back pain "a little bit better" but the condition is present all the time. Activity increases the pain, rather than diminishing it, including all of the activities he does at work, i.e. sitting, driving, leaning, lifting, pushing, et cetera.
23  The plaintiff says he cannot perform at work to the same level that he did before the accident. Before the accident he was fit, strong and able to work as long as the hours permitted. His route involved driving a 5-ton truck mostly in the Richmond area, working eight to nine hours a day and with frequent overtime that he never refused.
24  The plaintiff returned to work at UPS a month and a half after the accident. He resumed his usual route until early 2015 when the run became classified as a full-time position, was put out to "bid", and he found himself bumped by a full-time driver. He attributes losing the route to the accident; while he was off work for that one-and-a-half-month period a full-time driver was assigned who realized that the route was better than his own run. That driver therefore started pushing to make the route full time, notwithstanding the plaintiff's efforts to convince him otherwise, and the change did eventually occur in February 2015.
25  Following his return to UPS after the accident, the plaintiff says he has never missed any work nor refused any overtime offered. The work on the 5-ton truck was physically challenging but the dimensions of the truck allowed him to use a power jack for loading and unloading skids.
26  Since losing his run, the plaintiff is obliged to take whatever runs assigned by the company each day. Often this involves "shuttle runs" where he drives some of the smaller vehicles to designated collection points and transfers packages from other trucks, which he then transports back to base and unloads. Because of the smaller dimensions of the vehicle, he is doing a lot more leaning, kneeling and lifting from cramped positions, something he finds physically challenging. He finds himself working a little slower and sometimes calls on other workers to help him out if they are available.
27  Working his previous route, the plaintiff generally had 40 hours of work a week even though he was categorized as a part-time employee. Since February 2015, however, he has been assigned fewer hours, perhaps as much as 30 hours a week on average but his impression is that the number of hours is actually diminishing. He also now finds himself working Saturdays on a regular basis.
28  The plaintiff says UPS had asked him in the past to become a full-time driver, which would have included more hours with regular overtime (the overtime is mandatory for full-time drivers). He had enjoyed the flexibility of being a part-time driver working during the week on basically a full-time basis, combined with his delivery business for the Bombay furniture stores, and so had always declined the idea of going full time. He says that if for any reason he ever lost his delivery business, he always had the ability to become a full-time driver at UPS and this is what he would have done. Becoming a full-time driver, however, would mean going to the bottom of the full-time seniority list and becoming a "swing driver", i.e. filling in on all the different routes company-wide. It is, he says, very demanding work which, because of his injuries, he has come to realize he is no longer able to do.
29  Just a month before trial, the plaintiff says he worked a full-time route for three consecutive days. The first day was in North Burnaby and involved 120 stops and pickups over an 11-hour period. The following day involved trips back and forth to Chilliwack and the third day again involved over 100 stops in Burnaby over 10 1/2 hours. The plaintiff says the work was extremely painful on his back: "I did it, but I was broken" afterwards. It is this experience, he says, which has made him realize that he is simply not capable of doing full-time work at UPS.
30  The plaintiff says he has not disclosed his physical difficulties to UPS management. He says he is afraid to let his employer know because he fears they will "cut my hours even more" and that they "don't want you if you are injured".
31  The plaintiff's delivery business has also petered out. He worked for both the Granville Street and Richmond Centre stores of the Bombay Company. The Richmond store manager was familiar with the plaintiff's pricing and often made arrangements directly with the customer. The managers tended to change more frequently at the Granville store, however, and they simply gave his phone number to their customers. All customers paid the plaintiff cash on delivery. Once in a while the Bombay store paid him directly, usually by cheque, if some sort of store-approved exchange was required, e.g. when goods were defective or damaged.
32  The Bombay store deliveries involved all kinds of furniture. The plaintiff says he had developed his own techniques respecting the loading and unloading of the products into his van by himself. Because of his injuries, he says he stopped deliveries for approximately three months following the accident but then started up again in September 2012. He turned down the "heavy stuff" but even so he occasionally got help from friends as necessary.
33  Following the accident, the plaintiff says he did not get the same volume of work from the Bombay stores. He believes they knew he was injured in the accident and, in particular, that the manager in the Richmond store had noticed his difficulties and decided not to call so much even though the two of them had a good relationship. The Granville store went out of business in early 2015.
34  The cessation of the delivery work and the change of work assignments at UPS has resulted in reduced income for the plaintiff and financial difficulties for his family. Since February 2015, he says the family has not been earning enough to cover expenses. Their townhouse is mortgaged to its full value (<damage type = "other">$345,000</damage>). Their two credit cards are almost maxed out to their limits (<damage type = "other">$5,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$1,000</damage> respectively). Their two lines of credit are drawn down to a total of approximately <damage type = "other">$12,500</damage>. Car payments are required every two weeks on his wife's 2013 Toyota Corolla. These financial difficulties are contributing to the plaintiff's ongoing stress and depressed mood.
35  The plaintiff had not formulated any formal retirement plans before the accident. While he is 52 years old, his children are young, aged 10 and 4 at present, and he hoped they would both go to university. He says his wife had expected him to work until age 75 and he agreed that this would likely be required. Before the accident, the plaintiff says he "loved to work" and envisaged no difficulty in working beyond the "usual" retirement age of 65. On cross-examination however, he did acknowledge that there are only two employees at UPS who are in their early 60s and none over the age of 65.
36  The plaintiff is passionate about soccer. He played competitive soccer throughout his life. He currently plays with a team called "Richmond Inter", an over-40s side in a recreational league. It is meant to be a less physical "no slide tackle" game. There are five or six other Bosnian players on the team. He has always played the striker position.
37  When he returned to soccer in 2013 he started slowly, playing only 10 to 15 minutes a game. He still tries to keep his time under 45 minutes a game but sometimes, when substitutes are short, he will play longer. He is tired and has discomfort in his back when he plays. The month prior to trial he played almost a full game and says he was "in trouble" physically. He says, "I don't cry" and "It is my choice to go back to soccer" notwithstanding the pain. He believes it will help him get stronger.
38  The plaintiff's kinesiologist has taught him exercises to strengthen his core and abdomen without hurting his back. He does these exercises at home regularly. He uses a mat and Swiss ball as well as a balance machine. He does not lift weights but uses stretch bands for his chest, arm and leg exercises.
39  Before the accident the plaintiff says he was "quite a good husband" and made a point of helping his wife and "doing my part" in terms of assistance with household chores such as vacuuming and washing the dishes. Before the accident they were a very social couple, entertaining frequently. Nowadays they do not entertain as frequently. He finds it very difficult to help her physically. Vacuuming is "definitely uncomfortable".
40  Before the accident the plaintiff described himself as being very open, outgoing, social and "never depressed". He says it is the opposite today. He is a different person. He is "in trouble", with both financial and physical difficulties. He stated tearfully that he was "trying to be strong" but that it was "very difficult".
41  His relationship with his wife has become different since the accident. He becomes irritated more quickly, they argue a lot more, but he stresses that he is not "nasty" and that he "still loves her deeply".
42  The plaintiff is very close to his father who is now 87 years old. His mother died in 2006 and his father lived by himself for a number of years before becoming sick and moving into a care home in 2011. His father needed help moving up and down stairs. The plaintiff brought him over to the family home three to four times a week before the accident. This continued after the accident but the frequency declined as it became more difficult for the plaintiff to assist his father moving up and down stairs. His father is now wheelchair bound and no longer comes to the family home, but the plaintiff visits him at least once a week.
DEFENDANT'S TESTIMONY
43  Ms. Davoody is 29 years old and is currently a full-time student at Douglas College earning a bachelor's degree in social work. She lives in Vancouver but at the time of the accident was living on Bath Road, Richmond, with her mother and brother.
44  At the time of the accident, Ms. Davoody was driving to the library from her home. She stopped at the stop sign at the intersection of Bath Road and No. 5 Road. Her intention was to turn left to proceed south on No. 5 Road and she turned on her left-turn signal.
45  Ms. Davoody says she was stopped at the stop sign for as long as a minute. This was because there was a lot of traffic that morning and she remembers at least five cars coming from the left, i.e. going north.
46  There was a van heading north in the curb lane of No. 5 Road, which signalled to make a right turn onto Bath Road. Ms. Davoody made sure that the van was not intending to go straight through the intersection before she started to creep out into the intersection to make her turn. She says she saw the plaintiff's van as he was "the next person behind the van turning left". He had already passed the intersection of No. 5 Road and Greenland Drive some distance to the south but she was not sure how far past that intersection he was. She assumed that he was driving at regular speed.
47  Ms. Davoody stated twice that when she started her turn she saw the plaintiff's van "six to eight car lengths away". As she was crossing the two lanes for northbound traffic she "saw the plaintiff coming into me" and they collided. Her impression was that he was "going fairly fast", over the speed limit, because he "came out of nowhere" and "I didn't see him".
48  Ms. Davoody acknowledged that she had been given a ticket by the police officers who attended the scene for "failure to yield". She said she disputed the ticket, but heard nothing further.
49  Ms. Davoody says she was injured in the accident but acknowledged that she did not issue any lawsuit against the plaintiff. She said she "couldn't afford the legal fees".
LAY WITNESSES
James Trainor
50  Mr. Trainor was a witness with a bird's-eye view of the accident. He lived with his roommate, Michael Westrand, in a second-floor apartment located on the northeast corner of Bath Road and No. 5 Road in Richmond. His apartment had an L-shaped balcony facing south on Bath Road and east on No. 5 Road. He was standing at the corner of his balcony, drinking coffee, having a smoke, and watching the traffic.
51  Mr. Trainor saw the defendant's Honda halt at the stop sign on Bath Road at the intersection with No. 5 Road. The latter has two lanes northbound and two lanes southbound. He noticed a vehicle northbound on No. 5 Road turn right to proceed west on Bath Road. At approximately the same time, the Honda left the stop sign and travelled across the two northbound lanes evidently intending to make a left turn. Mr. Trainor had the impression that the defendant accelerated quite sharply away from the stop sign. The Honda barely made it into the left center lane of the northbound lanes when she was struck by the plaintiff's van. In his opinion the defendant simply drove right into the path of the plaintiff and the latter could do nothing to avoid the impact.
52  The damage to both vehicles was substantial, particularly to the Honda. His assessment was that the van was travelling at "regular speed", essentially at the same speed as the other vehicles on No. 5 Road, perhaps 10 kilometres over the posted speed limit.
53  Mr. Trainor immediately went downstairs to the scene of the accident. He spoke with the driver of the van who was getting out of his vehicle. He was in a rather panicked state, repeating several times, "Oh my God! Why did she do that?".
54  Mr. Trainor attempted to speak to the defendant as well but she did not say anything. A little later another vehicle pulled up behind her and a person whom Mr. Trainor assumed was her husband or boyfriend instructed her not to say anything.
55  The police arrived within approximately 30 minutes. Mr. Trainor identified himself to the police officer as a witness to the accident but he was brushed off and no statement was taken. The police officer said he had already spoken to the two drivers.
Michael Westrand
56  Mr. Westrand was also on the balcony with Mr. Trainor at the time of the accident. However, his back was to the traffic as he was talking to Mr. Trainor. He turned around only one or two seconds before the impact actually occurred.
57  Mr. Westrand says he just caught sight of the defendant's vehicle leaving the stop sign. He saw the van trying to veer left but nonetheless striking the Honda as it crossed in front of the van.
58  He also went to the scene of the accident with Mr. Trainor. He did not speak with the woman who was driving the Honda nor did he speak to the police after they arrived.
59  He did not have enough time to assess the speed at which the van was travelling.
Sayed Faizi
60  Mr. Faizi is the manager of the Bombay Company store in Richmond Centre. He has worked at the store since 2003 and has been manager since 2007. He met the plaintiff in 2005 when the latter was working part time as a salesman and stock person at the Richmond store.
61  Mr. Faizi confirmed that in addition to his part-time work at the store, the plaintiff started making deliveries for Bombay Company customers in 2005 or 2006. The transaction was directly between the customer and the plaintiff but the store usually called the plaintiff to determine the charge for the trip in order to inform the customer, and if the customer was satisfied with the price, deal directly with the customer on the details.
62  The deliveries were made outside of the plaintiff's scheduled work hours. He used his own van. He received no payment for the deliveries from Bombay Company.
63  Mr. Faizi believes the plaintiff also made deliveries for the Granville store. He has no information as to the delivery work at that location.
64  Mr. Faizi confirmed that after the plaintiff was involved in his motor vehicle accident, he stopped delivery work at the store for a period. The plaintiff advised him he was unable to do the work because of the accident, so Mr. Faizi found someone else to make the deliveries. He is still using this replacement delivery worker at the present time. He stated he would have continued using the plaintiff for the delivery work if he had been able to carry on with those tasks after the accident.
65  The plaintiff stopped working at the Richmond Bombay Company store in 2009 or 2010 when he started to work for UPS. He continued his delivery work at the Bombay Company Granville store after that time, however.
Salem Causevic
66  Mr. Causevic is a 44-year-old information technology specialist who works for Telus Communications. He has known the plaintiff for approximately 20 years. Both are members of the Bosnian community and Mr. Causevic's wife used to live in the same apartment building as the plaintiff, his brother and his parents.
67  Mr. Causevic said he saw the plaintiff at least once a week in the years before the accident, sometimes three or more times a week. They frequently interacted at various Bosnian community events and they also skied and vacationed together.
68  Mr. Causevic described the plaintiff as an avid soccer player who often played in various over-30 and over-40 leagues. He was in very good shape and physically active.
69  Mr. Causevic saw the plaintiff a couple days after the accident. He was "in bad shape", limping, and in obvious pain and distress. The plaintiff has never fully recovered from the injuries. Mr. Causevic says he still sees the plaintiff limping on almost every occasion they meet and he obviously has some restrictions sitting, getting to his feet, getting out of the car and so on.
70  Before the accident, Mr. Causevic saw the plaintiff as stable, calm, approachable, and with a large circle of friends. At one point the plaintiff was president of the Bosnian Community Association. Following the accident, he has become less outgoing, even rude and abrupt on occasions. He has cut back his social interactions with both the community and his friends, and Mr. Causevic has noted the apparent development of quite a bit of conflict between the plaintiff and his wife.
71  Mr. Causevic confirmed that the plaintiff has attempted to return to soccer since the accident. He has seen him play a few times and the plaintiff pretty obviously has problems with his leg. He plays less than half a game, and then spends time on the sidelines stretching and massaging his leg. He used to be an impressive striker, scoring lots of goals, but now he no longer scores nor does he tackle.
72  Mr. Causevic compared the vacations the two families had taken together in Osoyoos in 2011 and 2013. On the first occasion the plaintiff got up early in the morning and go for a lengthy run around the lake from his hotel to Mr. Causevic's camping site, and then back again (approximately 10 kilometres). In 2013 the plaintiff was in tremendous pain because of the driving and while the families were at the beach together, the plaintiff was often receiving physiotherapy treatment in town.
73  Mr. Causevic confirmed that he assisted the plaintiff with some of his Bombay Company deliveries from time to time. He can only recall one such instance before the accident but a number of such occasions following the accident. The assistance was with the heavier or more awkward pieces of furniture such as beds, and sets of drawers.
Alma Cunjalo
74  Ms. Cunjalo is the plaintiff's wife. She is 35 years old. They met in Bosnia in 1998 and were married on June 8, 2002.
75  Ms. Cunjalo has a bachelor's degree in biology from UBC. She works full time as a lab technologist. Her salary is approximately <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage> per annum.
76  The couple have two daughters, 10-year-old Selma and four-year-old Emina. The latter was nine months at the time of the accident.
77  Ms. Cunjalo described her husband as a positive, happy and social person who enjoyed sports, particularly soccer, and had a wide circle of friends. Following the accident she says that because of his persistent pain and resulting physical limitations, he has become much easier to anger, "stressed out", and much less social and talkative. Whereas before the accident, the couple never fought, she says they now fight a lot and she believes he is "taking out" his pain on her and the two children. Sexual relations have become much less frequent.
78  Before the accident the plaintiff had no problems sleeping. Nowadays he tosses and turns, groans, wakes up during the night, and sometimes sleeps in a different bedroom to avoid disturbing her.
79  Before the accident, the plaintiff did a lot of the chores around the house. While cooking was generally her responsibility, he usually did the dishes, undertook all of the vacuuming and cleaning the bathrooms. Since the accident, he has not been able to do the chores in the same fashion. It is clear to her that he does want to help but she sees him in pain and so she relieves him of the tasks and does it herself.
80  Ms. Cunjalo confirmed that the plaintiff was off work as a result of the accident for approximately a month and a half. Thereafter, he resumed work at UPS but things have been very different for him. He experiences a lot of pain, takes pain killers, and is generally exhausted when he comes home. Things appear to have become particularly hard for him in the last six months when his duties at UPS were changed from a route using a large truck to other routes using different vehicles.
81  Ms. Cunjalo believes the accident has affected her husband's self-esteem a great deal. He comes from a traditional background with the expectation that men are the primary providers in the family and generally stoic, macho individuals. He was a hard worker and a passionate, skilful soccer player. Family was very important and the plaintiff brought his father over to the house three times a week for dinner and helped him climb the stairs in their three-level townhouse as necessary. Since the accident, although the plaintiff is trying to tough it out, he cannot do the same activities as before; he can no longer help his father up the stairs and visits to their home have stopped entirely. While he still plays soccer, he is far less aggressive, no longer tackles, and plays for much shorter periods. He keeps playing despite the pain.
82  Ms. Cunjalo also believes the plaintiff's injuries affected his relationship with his younger daughter. She says he was unable to lift, hold and carry his daughter. She says the younger daughter always wants her mother and the relationship with her father is completely different from his relationship with the eldest daughter. She attributes all of this to the accident.
Darren McLennan
83  Mr. McLennan was called as a witness for the defence. He is a director at BC Housing but was called to testify in his capacity as player-coach of a team in the Richmond soccer league.
84  Mr. McLennan met the plaintiff in 2013. The plaintiff and some other Bosnian soccer players came out for the conclusion of the September-March season and the plaintiff signed up to play for the team in the summer season of 2014. It is an over 40 "old-timers" league. The season starts in April and concludes towards the end of August. He also played for the 2014-15 winter season.
85  Even though the plaintiff is somewhat older than many of the other players, Mr. McLennan described him as being very skilled and athletic. The plaintiff plays as a "striker" and because of his talent was very much Mr. McLennan's "go-to man".
86  The over 40 league is supposed to be a "no slide tackle" game. However, there is a fair bit of contact and even the occasional fight.
87  The plaintiff showed up for most of the team games and got "his share" of playing time. A regular substitution of players takes place and all players, including the strikers, rotate on and off the field as necessary.
88  Mr. McLennan was not asked nor did he volunteer any information about whether the plaintiff displayed any obvious signs of injury or pain when playing soccer.
Karl Madsen
89  Mr. Madsen is the vice president of operations for UPS at the Vancouver airport location. The workforce comprises both full-time and part-time drivers. It is a unionized work place and seniority plays a significant role on route allocation. There are 117 full-time drivers on the payroll and 30% have been with UPS for more than 10 years. There are 80 full-time routes, although 20% of the drivers are off on any given day because of vacations, sickness and the like.
90  There are also 17 part-time drivers and also shuttle runs between pick-up points in the airport.
91  Until recently, the plaintiff had been allocated the "Richmond #5" route. It involved driving a five-ton truck in a fairly tight geographical area within Richmond and Vancouver. There were three to six deliveries in the morning and six to 10 pickups in the afternoon. Even though his was a part-time position the plaintiff was essentially working full time, five days a week, seven and a half to eight and a half hours a day.
92  In February of this year the #5 run became classified as a full-time route and required a full-time driver. Mr. Madsen approached the plaintiff and asked him if he wished to become a full-time driver. He did so because the plaintiff was essentially losing the route he'd had the previous five years. As a full-time driver he would go to the bottom of the full-time drivers' seniority list and he likely would have been assigned a different route altogether.
93  The plaintiff declined the offer. He advised Mr. Madsen he "didn't think he could do the job physically". Mr. Madsen did not inquire further. In his experience the plaintiff had never complained of any difficulties doing the work and had never asked for help as far as he knew. If the plaintiff had accepted the offer of a full-time position, Mr. Madsen says he would have awarded it to him.
94  The plaintiff has continued as a part-time driver with UPS. Part-time drivers get whatever is assigned to them for the day. The routes will change frequently. Full-time drivers are guaranteed eight hours of work a day and often as long as nine to 12 hours. Part-timers, as the name suggests, get fewer hours of work.
Gurch Khrod
95  Mr. Khrod is the human resource representative in BC for UPS. He is the individual who signed a Certificate of Earnings (marked as Exhibit 6) following the accident in support of the plaintiff's application for benefits from ICBC. That certificate indicates that the plaintiff has been employed with UPS since October 2006, that his gross earnings in the 12 months before the accident were approximately <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage> and that his average work hours per week was 40.25 at a rate of <damage type = "other">$19.98</damage> an hour. The overtime rate earned by the plaintiff at the time was <damage type = "other">$29.97</damage> and his remuneration also included 6% holiday pay.
96  The plaintiff was off work for 30 days following the accident covering the period June 1, 2012 to July 16, 2012.
97  A new collective agreement was recently negotiated with the UPS workforce. Both full-time and part-time workers receive an extended health plan as well as coverage for BC Medicare premiums, all paid 100% by the Company. Part-time rates currently top out at <damage type = "other">$21.88</damage> gross in comparison with the <damage type = "other">$27.64</damage> paid to full-time workers i.e. this is approximately a 30% difference. Holiday pay is determined by the length of employment and ranges from 4.5% for those in the one to five year band to a maximum of 12.5% for employees with 25 years or more experience.
98  The plaintiff was entitled to apply to become a full-time driver following his first three months on the job. However, he never applied. Mr. Khrod acknowledged that some part-time drivers eligible to become full time have not applied as a matter of personal choice.
99  UPS drivers are paid weekly, every Friday by way of direct deposit. In the month before the accident, May 2012, the plaintiff worked 39.67, 45.65, 39.65 and 31.83 hours respectively for the four weeks in question. Overtime is paid if a driver works more than eight hours on any given day or more than 40 hours in any given week.
Michael Tsitlenok
100  Mr. Tsitlenok has been a part-time driver for UPS for three and a half years. He met the plaintiff two years ago when he was driving a five-ton truck. For the last few months the plaintiff has been driving other vehicles and Mr. Tsitlenok sees him at the depot about 5:00 p.m. when the trucks return to home site.
101  Mr. Tsitlenok testified that over the last few months he has seen the plaintiff unloading his truck on many occasions. He has seen the plaintiff holding his back and frequently taking a rest during the procedure. He has had difficulty keeping up the pace on many occasions and Mr. Tsitlenok, as well as well as others, has helped him quite a few times.
Artyom Rakhmatulin
102  Mr. Rakhmatulin met the plaintiff over five years ago when he was hired at UPS. He has been a full-time driver since January 2010. He says that the plaintiff helped them a great deal following his initial on-the-job training. Before the accident the plaintiff never asked for help and Mr. Rakhmatulin never saw him in any physical difficulty. He is however "very different now".
103  Mr. Rakhmatulin says the plaintiff has "completely changed". He watches the plaintiff's face when he is moving around and can see he is in pain. He is much slower and often asks for help. Mr. Rakhmatulin says he can see the plaintiff suffering and if he has spare time, he will help the plaintiff with lifting the "heavy stuff".
104  Mr. Rakhmatulin says the plaintiff used to be a jovial and joking storyteller. However the plaintiff's mood has changed and he is now much less pleasant and outgoing.
Nihad Krupic
105  Mr. Krupic is 54 years old and immigrated to Canada from Bosnia in 1994. He is a general contractor who owns a small business. He has known the plaintiff for many years.
106  Mr. Krupic was a professional soccer player in both Bosnia and Slovenia before coming to Canada. Since his arrival, he has continued to play soccer at a very high level, including coaching and playing in the "open" division of non-professional soccer leagues.
107  Mr. Krupic sees the plaintiff quite frequently, at least four to five times per month. He knows the plaintiff's wife and daughters.
108  While Mr. Krupic does not play soccer on the plaintiff's team, he played various tournaments from 2013 to 2015 on teams assembled by the plaintiff.
109  In an April 2013 over-40 tournament in Squamish, the plaintiff wore a jersey but played only 35 to 40 minutes the entire tournament (roughly 5 to 7 minutes a game). According to Mr. Krupic, the plaintiff was in obvious pain and could not play in any competitive way.
110  In the 2015 Squamish tournament, Mr. Krupic says the plaintiff played roughly the same amount of limited time. He was still in obvious pain, frequently holding his lower back. He avoided tackles. According to Mr. Krupic the plaintiff just "can't play [competitively] anymore".
111  Before the accident, Mr. Krupic had never known the plaintiff to have any significant injuries. He described the plaintiff as "very disciplined", someone who did not smoke or drink and who was very competitive and very talented at soccer. The plaintiff, he says, was in "excellent shape", happy, cheerful, and hard-working.
112  Following the accident, Mr. Krupic says he has seen a "big change" and that the plaintiff is "not the same man". He described the plaintiff as formerly being a "patient" person who liked to listen but now seems to have lost focus and his "mental status has changed". The plaintiff is a "very proud man" who has not been able to maintain his business and who appears to be under big pressure.
113  Mr. Krupic says he has extensive experience as a player and coach at the highest levels in soccer and he knows when a person is having physical or mental issues. He has seen the plaintiff limping off the playing field in obvious pain. To Mr. Krupic, the plaintiff's physical problems are clear and significant.
Jacqueline Stairs
114  Ms. Stairs lives at 3331 No. 5 Road, just south of the intersection with Bath Road. She left her house at 8:30 that morning and was walking north on No. 5 Road heading to work.
115  Ms. Stairs says that something made her look right, over her shoulder, possibly a honking horn. She noticed the defendant's Honda Accord motor vehicle coming across the southbound lanes intending to turn left. She saw the plaintiff's van when it was two to three car lengths away. She was an eyewitness to the collision.
116  Ms. Stairs' impression was that the van was speeding. She acknowledged on cross-examination, however, that she only had a couple of seconds' observation to get that impression.
MEDICAL/EXPERT WITNESSES
Dr. Lisa Caillier
117  Dr. Caillier is a physiatrist, specializing in physical medicine and rehabilitation. This specialty involves five years of post-medical degree training and certification through the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada. The specialty has two particular areas of expertise; the assessment, diagnosis and treatment of musculoskeletal problems and secondly, rehabilitation of resulting impairments and disabilities.
118  Dr. Caillier is not the plaintiff's treating physician. At the request of plaintiff's counsel, she undertook "independent medical evaluations" of the plaintiff on November 29, 2013 and June 2, 2015, thereafter preparing reports on those evaluations dated December 30, 2013 and June 15, 2015 respectively.
119  At the request of defence counsel, the first two reports of Dr. Caillier along with her file materials were reviewed by Dr. Robin Rickards, an orthopedic surgeon who currently focuses on non-surgical orthopedic care and chronic pain management. Dr. Rickards prepared a report dated August 31, 2015 criticizing Dr. Caillier's diagnosis of chronic mechanical back pain and particularly her prognosis that the plaintiff was unlikely to become pain-free and would continue to have pain into the future. Dr. Rickards was particularly critical of Dr. Caillier's failure to identify and recommend two treatment methodologies which, when properly performed, often provide full and complete relief of mechanical back pain, namely MBBs and RFR.
120  Dr. Caillier received Dr. Rickards' report and drafted a supplemental report dated September 30, 2015. In that report she reviewed her clinical experience with these procedures and reiterated her opinion that the plaintiff was unlikely to become either pain-free or limitation/restriction-free in the future.
121  In her first report dated December 30, 2013, Dr. Caillier describes the plaintiff's various symptoms from accident which had since resolved. They included abrasions on the left hand, blunt trauma and bruising to the knees, headaches and dizziness, tinnitus (ringing in the ears), and soft tissue injury to the neck and upper back. She also diagnosed ongoing symptomology including (1) soft tissue musculoligamentous injury/mechanical low back pain, (2) right piriformis syndrome (right gluteal muscle pressing against the sciatic nerve causing intermittent pain radiating down the right leg and into the foot), (3) sleep disruption, and (4) emotional and psychological symptoms (depressed mood). In her opinion, all of these conditions were caused by the motor vehicle accident. However, she also opined that successful participation in an active rehabilitation program including massage and physiotherapy and possibly trigger-point injections could result in positive responses that might resolve all of the symptomology without future limitation, restriction or disability.
122  Dr. Caillier evaluated the plaintiff for the second time one and a half years later in early June 2015. In the interim the plaintiff participated in an active rehabilitation program consisting of 35 one-to-one sessions with a kinesiologist. By that time the right piriformis syndrome had resolved, however, the low back pain symptomology had only marginally improved. Dr. Caillier observed that the plaintiff had not responded to the active rehabilitation program as well as she had anticipated. Given the chronicity of his low back pain and the lack of significant benefit from the intervening active rehabilitation program, her opinion was that:
the soft tissue and mechanical low back pain will likely continue, although improvements in physical conditioning and participation in an ongoing and life-long exercise program might assist;
even with an ongoing and life-long exercise program, he will still have pain and symptomatic flair-ups of pain dependent upon activities;
heavier activities or activities requiring repetitive bending or sustained posturing increase the plaintiff's susceptibility and vulnerability to worsening of pain;
the plaintiff's ability to return to his own business of weekend furniture delivery is poor and such a return is unlikely;
the plaintiff has reduced durability and his ability to continue with his current position as a UPS driver, involving heavier lifting and carrying is questionable. He may have to look for a more sedentary type of employment in the future;
while he is capable of continuing activities according to pain level and tolerance, he is unlikely to return to his full scope of pre-MVA level of functioning;
while sleep disruption has improved, this is a condition secondary to his lower back problems and will likely continue to be an issue; and
since his depressed mood was secondary to his pain and reduced level of functioning, he will likely continue to experience ongoing emotional and psychological symptoms.
123  Dr. Caillier recommended the plaintiff have exercise equipment in his home as well as access to a gym environment. In her opinion, a life-long commitment to exercise is important to properly managing of all his symptoms, particularly the low back pain. She also recommended a trial of an antidepressant medication, Cymbalta, which might also be beneficial for the management of the lower back pain.
124  Dr. Caillier persisted in her prognosis of continued low back pain even following challenges from Dr. Rickards' recommendations for treatment using MBBs and a rhizotomy. She stated that the branch blocks are a diagnostic tool to identify the level of lumbar facet joints generating the lower back pain. They provide only short-term benefit to pain management. The rhizotomy can improve mechanical lower back pain emanating from the facet joints but it is unlikely to impact soft tissue pain or pain from other spine conditions such as an annular tear. She emphasized that even though such procedures might prove beneficial in terms of pain reduction, in her extensive clinical experience, none of the patients she referred for such procedures over the past five to six years have become pain-free. She does not think these treatments will eliminate the plaintiff's pain in the long term or will permit him to return to his pre-MVA level of functioning. She expects that his low back pain will continue and negatively impact both his work and his recreational activities.
125  On cross-examination Dr. Caillier stated she was "certainly in agreement" with the plaintiff "trying" the MBB and RFR procedures towards reducing his low back pain symptomology and improving his functionality. She also agreed the plaintiff should undergo MRI imaging to ascertain whether there was in fact an annular tear which could then be treated by an epidural steroid injection. Similarly, she agreed that the Cymbalta medication would be another pain management tool that may have a beneficial impact on the plaintiff's mood. She stressed, however, that these recommended procedures and medication would have to be prescribed by the plaintiff's family doctor and not herself since she was not the plaintiff's treating physician.
Dr. Robin Rickards
126  Dr. Rickards is an orthopedic surgeon whose practice is currently focused on non-surgical orthopedic care and chronic pain management. The plaintiff made no objection to his qualifications to express opinions on the assessment, diagnosis and treatment of back pain.
127  Dr. Rickards' practice in general orthopedic surgery includes 10 years of surgical spine intervention. He undertook special training in chronic pain management at the Jim Pattison Outpatient Care and Surgery Centre in Surrey BC, which included MBBs, rhizotomies and epidural steroid injections. He is the owner-operator of the Langley Surgical Centre in Langley, BC, and unlike Dr. Caillier, has personally performed a large number of MBB and RFR procedures.
128  Notably, Dr. Rickards himself underwent these procedures at the age of 58 for his own problems with low back pain. The procedures were successful and likely contribute to his enthusiastic support for their use on patients such as the plaintiff.
129  Dr. Rickards did not undertake any physical examination of the plaintiff. His assessment and report were based on a review of the plaintiff's various medical records, including Dr. Caillier's reports and notes as well as the clinical records of the plaintiff's family physician, Dr. Cohen.
130  Dr. Rickards accepts Dr. Caillier's diagnosis of the plaintiff's low back pain condition. He agrees with her recommendation that the plaintiff should continue with a muscle strengthening and exercise program to help alleviate symptoms. However, he completely disagrees with Dr. Caillier's prognosis that the plaintiff will suffer from chronic pain preventing him from continuing his work to age 65 and which will also interfere with his recreational activities. Rather, in his opinion, if the plaintiff underwent the MBB and RFR procedures, the plaintiff would likely experience a full and complete recovery and see a return to his pre-MVA status including his work and recreational activities.
131  MBBs involve injection of a local anaesthetic under x-ray guidance to temporarily freeze the nerve affecting the involved facet joints. If substantial pain relief occurs, a rhizotomy is indicated. The latter procedure involves insertion of needle-like electrodes in the base of the nerves of the involved facet joints and destroying these nerves using controlled heat, removing the sensory input from the involved facet joints.
132  According to Dr. Rickards, the success rate is extremely high for full and complete pain relief with these procedures when properly performed on appropriately selected patients. It has been proved by many independent studies and reflects the experience of his own patients. While patients who are in their 80s and have arthritis often require repeat treatment within one or two years, younger patients will often require no further treatment at all.
Dr. Leslie Cohen
133  Dr. Cohen was not called as an expert witness by either party. Rather, his attendance at the trial was pursuant to a subpoena issued by the defendant. He identified and reviewed his clinical records respecting the plaintiff's treatment and those records were entered into evidence.
134  Dr. Cohen first met the plaintiff on the day of the accident in June 2012. He saw him again on June 6, 15 and 29, 2012 as well as July 5, 2012. He next saw the plaintiff on September 27, 2013 and has not seen him since.
135  Dr. Cohen's clinical records are difficult to understand. Also, he had no present memory of the plaintiff's attendances at his office and his testimony consisted of interpreting his notes respecting same.
136  The June 1 notations reflect a physical examination at which Dr. Cohen noted pain in the lower back, neck, right shoulder, right knee and right arm. The plaintiff was prescribed medication and advised to remain off work.
137  On June 6 Dr. Cohen noted ongoing pain and no improvement. On June 15 he noted that the plaintiff had started physiotherapy treatments and was feeling a little bit better. On June 29, he noted the plaintiff was still undergoing physiotherapy. He also noted pain in the leg and feet.
138  On July 5, 2012 Dr. Cohen noted that the plaintiff was continuing with physiotherapy and felt he was improving. He still had tenderness and decreased range of motion in the back. The plaintiff was able to do squats but they triggered back pain. He recommended continued physiotherapy and a return to work by July 10, 2012.
139  On September 27, 2013, Dr. Cohen noted the plaintiff's reported acute onset of pain in the right buttock and down the right leg during a drive to Osoyoos the previous month. The plaintiff stopped numerous times during the trip and although he received massage treatment in Osoyoos, he had continued to experience ongoing discomfort both during the trip back to Vancouver and since. On physical examination Dr. Cohen noted a lack of flexibility in the back along with stiffness and tenderness in both the back and right buttock and thigh area. He diagnosed a "sprain" and prescribed medication and physiotherapy.
LIABILITY
140  The law is well-settled that in order to succeed with a claim for personal injuries and damages arising from a motor vehicle accident, the plaintiff must prove on a balance of probabilities the following constituent elements comprising the tort of negligence:
the defendant owed the plaintiff a duty of care (to avoid acts or omissions which might be reasonably foreseeable to cause injury to the latter);
the defendant's acts or omissions breached the standard of care applicable to that duty;
the plaintiff suffered loss or damage of a sort that is recognized and compensable in law; and
the defendant's breach was causative, in both fact and law, of the plaintiff's loss or damage.
(See Hill v. Hamilton-Wentworth Regional Police Services Board, ,  at para. 90; Mustapha v. Culligan of Canada Ltd., ,  at para. 3; Ediger v. Johnston, ,  at para. 24.)
141  In order to "perfect" any cause of action for the tort of negligence, the defendant's negligent conduct must cause the plaintiff's loss or damage. Although the response to civil claim alleges that the plaintiff sustained no loss or damage as a result of the accident, the defendant conceded at trial that Mr. Dzumhur was indeed injured at the time. Rather, the defendant's position at trial was that:
the accident was caused solely by the fault or negligence of the plaintiff; and
in any event, the extent of the injury is exaggerated and has not in fact caused pecuniary loss in any meaningful way.
142  To the extent that this action involves a claim for the apportionment of liability for damages, this province's Negligence Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 333 applies. The Act provides:
if by the fault of two or more persons damage or loss is caused to one or more of them, the liability to make good the damage or loss is in proportion to the degree to which each person was at fault;
the degree to which each person was at fault must be ascertained and expressed as a percentage of the total fault;
the person sustaining the damage or loss is entitled to recover from each other person causing same the percentage of the damage or loss that corresponds to the degree of fault of that other person; and
the amount of damage or loss and the existence and degree of any fault causing same are questions of fact.
143  In the present case, these provisions mean that:
if the accident and any resulting loss or damage was caused solely by the fault of the plaintiff, then the defendant will have no liability to pay damages; but
if the accident and any resulting loss or damage was caused by the fault of the defendant, then the defendant is liable to pay compensation to the plaintiff for his loss in proportion to her degree of fault, whether that be 1% or 100% as the Court may determine.
144  The Response to Civil Claim contains various "boilerplate" allegations of the plaintiff's contributory fault, several having no application to the circumstances (e.g. going through a red light, ignoring a flagman's directions, excessive speed in a construction zone). Interestingly, the Response does not even plead the plaintiff was exceeding the speed limit, merely that he was driving without due care and attention, failing to keep an adequate lookout, and failing to stop his motor vehicle in time to avoid the collision.
145  Sections 186 and 175 of the Motor Vehicle Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 318, govern the entry of a vehicle onto a highway from a stop sign. The driver must stop at the stop sign and yield the right-of-way to traffic approaching the intersection "so closely that it constitutes an immediate hazard". In more common parlance, and in accord with simple common sense, a vehicle wishing to turn left onto a highway from a stop sign located at T-intersection must not do so unless the turn can be completed in a safe and timely manner having regard to the oncoming traffic in both directions on the highway.
146  I accept the evidence of the independent witness, Mr. Trainor, set out in paras. 50-55 of these reasons. His view of the accident was clear and unimpeded and he saw the events from start to finish.
147  I find as a fact that the defendant's vehicle left the stop sign as a van was making a right turn onto Bath Road from No. 5 Road, then crossed the first northbound lane and entered the second northbound lane where it was almost immediately struck by the vehicle driven by the plaintiff. I find as a fact the defendant simply drove right into the path of the plaintiff and he could do nothing to avoid the impact.
148  This conclusion is reinforced by the defendant's own testimony that the plaintiff's van was six to eight car lengths away when she started her turn. A vehicle travelling at 50 km/h is covering 13.9 metres per second and at 60 km/h is covering 16.66 metres per second. This is approximately three medium-sized car lengths per second. It was literally a matter of seconds for the plaintiff's vehicle to travel the stated distance of six to eight car lengths. In such circumstances, even a professional driver such as Mr. Dzumhur is not expected or required to have the lightning evasive reactions of a Formula One race car driver.
149  The evidence of both the defendant and the witness Jacqueline Stairs as to plaintiff's vehicle's speed is unreliable. Ms. Davoody was concentrating on and distracted by the approaching vehicle in the curb lane that intended to turn right onto Bath Road. She misperceived the distance of the plaintiff's vehicle from the intersection, assuming she even saw it at all, and Ms. Stairs' impression of speed was based on fleeting observation of no more than a couple seconds duration. Mr. Trainor's version of events, and that of the plaintiff himself, is far more reliable.
150  The court's determination and allocation of fault for a car accident is a question of fact. I find as a fact that the collision was caused entirely by the fault of the defendant attempting to make a left turn onto No. 5 Road when the plaintiff's vehicle was sufficiently close to the intersection so as to not only constitute a hazard but also render the resulting impact unavoidable. The plaintiff is not at fault in any way for the collision. The defendant is therefore 100% liable for any loss or damage caused by the accident.
CAUSATION AND THE ASSESSMENT OF DAMAGES IN A NEGLIGENCE CASE
151  As indicated above, to effect recovery in a negligence case, the plaintiff must prove on the balance of probabilities that the defendant's negligent conduct actually caused a loss or injury that is the subject matter of the claim.
152  The basic legal principles respecting causation are found in the seminal case of Athey v. Leonati, , repeated many times since, and which include:
the general, but not necessarily conclusive test for causation is the "but for" test requiring the plaintiff show his injury and loss would not have occurred but for the negligence of the defendant;
this causation test must not be applied too rigidly. Causation need not be determined by scientific precision as it is essentially a practical question of fact best answered by ordinary common sense;
it is not necessary for the plaintiff to establish that the defendant's negligence was the sole cause of the injury and damage. As long as it is it is part of the cause of an injury, the defendant is liable; and
apportionment does not lie between tortious causes and non-tortious causes of the injury or loss. The law does not excuse the defendant from liability merely because causal factors for which he is not responsible also helped to produce the harm.
153  In a personal injury case such as this, the plaintiff must establish causation not only for the personal injuries alleged to have been sustained but also for the losses for flowing from that injury. Even if the defendant did cause personal injury to the plaintiff, if the plaintiff cannot establish that the injury, in turn, caused a certain loss, the plaintiff cannot recover from the defendant for that loss.
154  The distinction between causation of personal injury and causation of loss consequent upon that injury is important. The former is concerned with establishing the existence of liability while the latter is concerned with the extent of that liability.
155  In the present case, for example, the defendant conceded at trial (if not in her pleadings) that the accident had caused personal injury to the plaintiff. However, she says the injury is relatively minor and the plaintiff exaggerates its effects. In particular, she argues that the plaintiff's injuries have not caused or resulted in any loss of future earning income earning capacity, which is perhaps the most significant component of the plaintiff's claim for damages.
CREDIBILITY OF THE PLAINTIFF
156  Defence counsel argues that the plaintiff is not a credible witness and that he exaggerates the effects of his injuries, notably, his asserted ongoing and disabling lower back pain. Counsel submits there is no objective evidence of such injury (e.g. x-rays, scans or MRIs), that Dr. Caillier's report is based almost entirely upon subjective complaints by the plaintiff, and she is not the plaintiff's treating physician, rather, is a consultant hired by the plaintiff's lawyer.
157  Defence counsel submits a number of inconsistencies exist between the evidence given by the plaintiff and his wife, and also other instances where the evidence was simply not worthy of belief. He pointed to one instance where the wife initially testified that her husband's father did not visit the family home at all after the accident and the plaintiff's insistence otherwise, including his assertion that his wife was mistaken in that regard. Similar contradictions were identified in the evidence, both at discovery and at trial, respecting the precise extent of the plaintiff's participation in vacuuming and other housekeeping duties.
158  Counsel ridiculed as absurd the assertion by both the plaintiff and his wife that his inability to take his younger daughter in his arms following the accident has distanced the daughter and the father. The daughter was only nine months old at the time of the accident.
159  Counsel also pointed to the plaintiff's production at trial of computer records detailing the cash income from the plaintiff's delivery business since inception. He contrasted this with the plaintiff's evidence at his examination for discovery that such records were only kept from 2010 onwards. At trial, the plaintiff testified that he "was wrong" on this point at his examination for discovery and counsel exclaimed incredulity at such a statement: "How do you just forget that you have been keeping such records on a daily basis for years?".
160  Counsel submits that the cumulative effect of these and other "inconsistencies" in evidence leads to the only logical inference that the plaintiff is exaggerating the effect of his injuries and that his wife and presumably others in support of the plaintiff are simply trying to bolster those exaggerated claims.
161  As was noted by Dillon J. in Bradshaw v Stenner,  at para. 186, aff'd by :
Credibility involves an assessment of the trustworthiness of a witness' testimony based upon the veracity or sincerity of a witness and the accuracy of the evidence that the witness provides (Raymond v. Bosanquet (Township) ,  (S.C.C.)). The art of assessment involves examination of various factors such as the ability and opportunity to observe events, the firmness of his memory, the ability to resist the influence of interest to modify his recollection, whether the witness' evidence harmonizes with independent evidence that has been accepted, whether the witness changes his testimony during direct and cross-examination, whether the witness' testimony seems unreasonable, impossible, or unlikely, whether a witness has a motive to lie, and the demeanour of a witness generally (Wallace v. Davis,  (Ont.H.C.); Farnya v. Chorny,  (B.C.C.A.) [Farnya]; R. v. S.(R.D.),  at para.128 (S.C.C.)). Ultimately, the validity of the evidence depends on whether the evidence is consistent with the probabilities affecting the case as a whole and shown to be in existence at the time (Farnya at para. 356).
162  I observed the plaintiff carefully while he was giving evidence. He answered questions in a forthright, frank and sincere fashion. I detected no fabrication or dissimulation. When he was unable to remember something, he said so in plain language.
163  I reject the defendant's submissions respecting the plaintiff's exaggeration. He presented as a plain-spoken, honest witness and while the evidence had some inconsistencies from time to time, I find his evidence to be generally truthful, unvarnished and credible.
FINDINGS AS TO THE PLAINTIFF'S INJURY, DISABILITY AND THE CONTINGENCY OF FUTURE MEDICAL TREATMENT
164  At the present time, I find that the plaintiff is not physically capable of full-time employment at UPS. I base this conclusion not only on Dr. Caillier's reports but also on the plaintiff's own testimony respecting his difficulties at work, including his recent experience of concerted effort over three long days resulting in considerable physical and emotional distress. I find that the plaintiff will very probably undergo the recommended MBB/RFR treatments within the next year and that these treatments will likely provide at least some improvement to the facet joint-related low back pain and increase the plaintiff's functionality. I also conclude, however, that notwithstanding the MBB/RFR treatments, the plaintiff is likely going to experience some degree of chronic and recurrent back pain throughout the balance of his life, which will continue to limit and restrict his physical activities. The episodes of back pain may be abated to some degree by a continued commitment to appropriate exercise as well as a repetition of rhizotomy procedures from time to time, but it is unlikely the plaintiff will ever become completely free of pain or limitations/restrictions in the future.
165  I have already observed that this case has some unusual features, including:
while the plaintiff consulted with Dr. Cohen for a short time following the accident, he has not sought treatment from a physician for over two years;
while the plaintiff complains of chronic low back pain characterized by Dr. Caillier in part as "mechanical in nature", no diagnostic medical imaging was undertaken (x-rays, scans, MRIs);
the only medical opinion testimony on behalf of the plaintiff comes from a physiatrist hired by the plaintiff's lawyer for the purposes of medical-legal reporting;
the "rebuttal" opinion from the expert witness tendered by the defence was based upon a "clinical records review" without any physical examination of the plaintiff;
the defendant's expert has recommended certain MBB/ RFR treatments to remedy the plaintiff's back ailments and the plaintiff's expert agrees these should be tried; and
the suggested treatments have yet to be carried out and their efficacy is a major contingency going right to the heart of any award for non-pecuniary and future pecuniary loss.
166  Dr. Caillier's June 15, 2015 report describes the plaintiff's injuries arising from the June 1, 2012 motor vehicle accident as well as his present medical condition:
soft tissue musculoligamentous injury involving the neck, upper back, and shoulder regions (resolved);
headaches and dizziness (resolved);
tinnitus (resolved);
abrasions to the hands (resolved);
blunt trauma to and bruising of the knees (resolved);
right piriformis syndrome (resolved);
occasional right foot pain;
soft tissue musculoligamentous injury involving the lower back region;
mechanical low back pain;
physical deconditioning;
reduced sleep secondary to lower back symptoms; and
emotional and psychological symptoms secondary to pain restricting physical functionalities and activities.
167  Dr. Caillier based her report on both the plaintiff's reporting of his symptoms and current functionality, as well as her own physical examination. All of this is described in detail over the span of six pages in her report.
168  I have already found that the plaintiff is a generally credible individual who accurately described his medical symptoms and functional restrictions without exaggeration. I find his recounting of these to Dr. Caillier as recorded in her June 15, 2015 report to likewise be balanced and accurate. I accept Dr. Caillier's diagnosis of ongoing chronic low back pain caused by the accident, which is both soft tissue and mechanical in nature. I also accept her opinion that the mechanical back pain likely originates from the posterior elements of the spine such as the facet joints.
169  I also accept that, absent any substantial improvement in symptomology arising from MBB and RFR treatments:
the back pain will continue, although further improvements in physical conditioning and a life-long exercise program will likely lessen the intensity of the pain and cause it to be more intermittent;
symptomatic flare-ups of pain will continue to occur when the plaintiff is involved in sustained posturing or heavier activities;
the pain and the symptomatic flare-ups will likely continue to negatively impact the plaintiff's home, recreational and work activities;
the chronic lower back pain, including its provocation by heavier lifting and carrying, reduces his durability to continue as a UPS driver until age 65 and may ultimately require him to consider a different and more sedentary form of employment;
the plaintiff's ability to engage in recreational activities such as skiing, bicycling and, in particular, soccer, is reduced but he is capable of engaging in them in so far as his tolerance of pain permits; however, it is unlikely he will return to his full scope of pre-accident level of function;
sleep disruption will continue but will not likely have a significant impact on his ability to function during the day; and
the ongoing pain and activity restrictions will continue to negatively impact his emotional health and mood.
170  The validity of Dr. Caillier's diagnosis is to some extent corroborated by the plaintiff's friends and co-workers whose testimony I find credible and accept without reservation.
171  The proverbial "elephant in the room" however, is the contingency of improving and perhaps even eliminating the plaintiff's low back pain symptomology through the MBB and RFR treatments recommended by Dr. Rickards. The question is whether and to what extent Dr. Rickards' opinion on the likelihood of "full and complete recovery" through these treatments is to be taken into account in assessing the plaintiff's future.
172  The plaintiff challenges the validity of Dr. Rickards' opinion on several bases:
it is a "records review" analysis without any physical examination of the plaintiff and should thus be given no weight, as occurred in cases such as Ruscheinski v. Biln,  and Kathuria v. Wildgrove, , reversed by  on other grounds;
Dr. Rickards misquotes Dr. Caillier's diagnosis by
ignoring her reference to the soft tissue musculoligamentous contribution to the back pain; and
describing the mechanical low back pain as "probably facet joint related" as opposed to simply being a possibility... He thus overstates the potentially curative impact of any MBB/RFR treatment;
MBBs are diagnostic not therapeutic in nature and two MBBs must provide relief in the 70 to 80% range prior to any RFR procedure. Whether any such level of relief can be expected in the plaintiff's particular circumstances is simply unknown at this stage i.e., the Rickards' panacea is nothing but speculation; and
while Dr. Rickards may have carried out 100 MBB/RFR procedures at his clinic to date, these have only occurred in the past two years and it is too early to tell whether his patients' pain relief is anything other than temporary in nature.
173  These criticisms have some validity. But Dr. Caillier agrees that the plaintiff should try MBB/RFR and the plaintiff himself has stated that he trusts Dr. Caillier's judgment such that he would undertake a treatment trial she suggests. Further, in final argument the defendant agreed that any future care award in this case would properly include at least <damage type = "other">$10,000</damage> as the cost of private MBB/RFR treatments.
174  In these circumstances, I conclude it is appropriate and necessary to assess damages on the basis that the plaintiff will probably undergo MBB/RFR treatments in the near future, likely within the next year. This, in turn, begs the next question: what will be the outcome of such procedures and how should these events factor into the assessment equation?
175  In Athey, the Supreme Court of Canada instructed that "future or hypothetical possibility will be taken into consideration as long as it is a real and substantial possibility and not mere speculation" (para. 27). In Parypa v. Wickware,  at para. 67, our Court of Appeal instructed that the trial court "must take into account all substantial possibilities and give them weight according to how likely they are to occur in light of all the evidence".
176  In Rosvold v. Dunlop,  at para. 9, the same court stated:
The standard of proof to be applied when evaluating hypothetical events that may affect an award is simple probability, not the balance of probabilities [citation omitted]. Possibilities and probabilities, chances, opportunities, and risks must all be considered, so long as they are a real and substantial possibility and not mere speculation. These possibilities are to be given weight according to the percentage chance they ... will happen.
177  In Villing v. Husseni, , the court was required to address the "uncertainty" as to the plaintiff's response to suggested treatment of MBB and RFR for the plaintiff's chronic low back pain caused by injury to the facet joints of her lumbar spine. As in the present case, there was a contest between a physiatrist who testified on behalf of the plaintiff and the orthopedic surgeon who testified for the defence, the same Dr. Rickards who has testified in this case.
178  In Villing, the expert physiatrist opined that if the MBB/RFR procedures were successful, then they might have to be repeated yearly. He also opined it was likely that the plaintiff would have to learn to live with some degree of chronic back pain that would have to be managed throughout her life.
179  In the Villing case, Dr. Rickards testified that the treatment could provide significant or full pain relief for 24 to 48 months or longer before the affected nerves would grow back and the pain could return, requiring repetition of the procedure. He explained how some older patients had to undergo as many as six rhizotomy procedures. He did not attach any specific degree of possibility to the 23-year-old plaintiff experiencing a permanent remission of her symptoms. He did state, however, that in cases involving younger individuals, the treatment "allowed":
a full, rapid, and complete recovery with return to pre- injury level of activity;
no risk of recurrence of the back pain problem; and
no increased predisposition or risk to the development of arthritic change in the lower back either in the short- or long-term.
180  Although the syntax is slightly different, Dr. Rickards expresses exactly the same conclusions in his August 31, 2015 report in this case.
181  In Villing, the court interpreted Dr. Rickards' opinion "as a statement only of a possible outcome" and not one to which any specific degree of probability was attached (para. 19). The court concluded that the plaintiff in that case was "facing, probably, a lifetime of some degree of chronic back pain and a need to manage her lifestyle and constantly be watchful" but also that "she has the possibility of long-term and perhaps permanent abatement of her facet joint pain through rhizotomies and rehabilitation" (para. 29). The court found that at least "a few rhizotomy treatments" would be required and possibly more. It held there was a "near-certainty of a future loss of income, as she recovers from these treatments" in the near term, and "a very high probability" of further loss arising out of treatments in the future (para. 43).
182  It was implicit in the Villing judgment that the rhizotomy procedures would likely provide at least some pain relief for the plaintiff; however, the court also held the plaintiff likely faced a lifetime of at least some degree of chronic back pain. The likelihood of future rhizotomy treatments was factored into the award of non-pecuniary damages as well as for the cost of future care (private procedure cost), and loss of future income while undergoing and recovering from the treatments.
183  I cannot simply conclude on the basis of Dr. Rickards' report/testimony that the MBB/RFR treatment will almost certainly result in a full and complete recovery from his chronic back pain and allow him to return to full activities at the pre-accident level. In my opinion, this conclusion would be unfair to the plaintiff. This possibility must be accounted for when assessing damages but I generally prefer and give considerable weight to Dr. Caillier's observations that:
while the procedures may improve the mechanical facet joint-related low back pain, they are unlikely to impact the soft tissue-generated lower back pain; and
none of her patients have experienced such a dramatic response to rhizotomy procedures. While some pain improvement will occur, multiple rhizotomy procedures will likely be required over the years and the plaintiff is unlikely to become free of pain or limitations/restriction.
NON-PECUNIARY GENERAL DAMAGES
184  The BC Court of Appeal in Stapley v. Hejslet,  at para. 46, identified a non-exhaustive list of factors to be considered in awarding non-pecuniary damages in personal injury cases:
age of the plaintiff;
nature of the injury;
the severity and duration of pain;
the degree of disability;
the extent of any emotional suffering;
the extent of loss or impairment of life;
impairment of family, marital and social relationships;
impairment of physical and mental abilities; and
loss of lifestyle.
185  The court also noted any stoicism on the part of the plaintiff should not, generally speaking, be a "penalizing factor".
186  While fairness of any award for non-pecuniary loss is often assessed by reference to awards made in comparable cases, the court in Stapley reiterated the impossibility of developing a "tariff" and emphasized that awards should vary to meet the specific circumstances of each individual case and, in particular, with an appreciation of the plaintiff's individual loss (para. 45).
187  In this case the plaintiff is 52 years old. He was athletic, fit, healthy, and active. He enjoyed his work, his furniture delivery side-business, his young family and a wide circle of friends in the Bosnian community. The accident and the resulting injuries resulted in significant change. While the initial soft tissue injuries and contusions resolved fairly quickly, he developed a painful sciatic condition, piriformis syndrome, and what has since become chronic pain in the lower back that is both mechanical and soft tissue in nature. That pain will likely be relieved to some degree by MBB and rhizotomy treatments in the future but the recurrence of pain in the lower back is likely to be a permanent feature.
188  No doubt the plaintiff's condition impaired his physical abilities and lifestyle, both in terms of soccer in which he was a passionate participant and as well as his family, marital and social relationships. This, combined with financial stresses from reduced income, has depressed the plaintiff's mood and resulted in some emotional suffering. He displays considerable stoicism, particularly in his determination and performance at work, but he should not be penalized for this. Some of these issues will likely be ameliorated to some degree in the future by virtue of any MBB and rhizotomy treatment protocol.
189  The plaintiff submits an appropriate award for non-pecuniary damages in this case would be <damage type = "other">$110,000</damage>. He cites a number of cases involving chronic back pain including: Park v. Abd El Malak,  at para. 98 awarding <damage type = "other">$80,000</damage>; Johnson v. Kitchener,  at para. 68 assessing the award at <damage type = "other">$90,000</damage> had the plaintiff not also been at fault for the injuries; Midgley v. Nguyen,  at para. 231 awarding <damage type = "other">$110,000</damage>; and Crane v. Lee,  at para. 49 awarding <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage>.
190  The defendant submits that an appropriate award for non-pecuniary loss in this case would be in the range of <damage type = "other">$35</damage>-<damage type = "other">$45,000</damage>. She cites two cases involving soft tissue injuries, causing persistent pain and loss of enjoyment of life for two relatively young plaintiffs: Perry v. Ismail,  at para. 95 awarding <damage type = "other">$42,500</damage> and Burton v. Insurance Corporation of British Columbia,  at para. 48 awarding approximately <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage>.
191  The defendant was the party who alerted the court to the Villing case, which also involved a youthful plaintiff facing "a lifetime of some degree of chronic back pain" albeit with the possibility of some pain abatement through repeated rhizotomies in the future. The defendant in the Villing case also recited the Perry and Burton cases. The court drew some parallels to another case involving MBB for an older individual's chronic back pain, Engqvist v. Doyle, , which awarded <damage type = "other">$70,000</damage> and the court in Villing ultimately assessed Ms. Villing's non-pecuniary damages in the amount of <damage type = "other">$85,000</damage>.
192  I have read each of the cases cited. In my view, the cases cited by the defendant do not reflect Mr. Dzumhur's situation, which is more parallel to the facts of the cases cited by the plaintiff as well as Villing and Engqvist. In my view, general damages for pain and suffering and non-pecuniary loss and other non-pecuniary loss in this case are properly and fairly assessed in the amount of <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$85,000</damage> and I award this amount accordingly.
LOSS OF PAST AND FUTURE INCOME EARNING CAPACITY
Past income loss
193  Mr. Dzumhur was off work for 30 working days from the date of the accident until July 16, 2012. The parties have agreed that the wage loss from his UPS employment during that period is in the net amount of <damage type = "other">$3,983.37</damage> excluding interest pursuant to the Court Order Interest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 79. I therefore award that amount rounded up to <damage type = "past wage loss">$4,000</damage> on account of net income loss for that time.
Past loss of earning capacity
194  Compensation for past loss of earning capacity is based on what the plaintiff would have, not could have, earned but for the injury that was sustained: Rowe v. Bobell Express Ltd.,  at para. 30; M.B. v. British Columbia, .
195  The plaintiff claims <damage type = "other">$21,500</damage> as an appropriate quantification of past loss of earning capacity to date of trial. The claim is in relation to the plaintiff's side-business of furniture delivery for the Bombay stores. Those deliveries ceased entirely for approximately three months following the accident and thereafter resumed but not to the levels formerly enjoyed before the accident, and ultimately declining through 2013 and 2014 when the business ceased. The plaintiff concedes that the business from the Granville Street Bombay store would have been lost in any event by virtue of that store's closure in 2015, but argues that given his work ethic and demonstrated work history, the plaintiff would have found alternative delivery customers had he not been injured.
196  The plaintiff assesses the loss by using the average revenue for 2010 and 2011 as a base annual income from the delivery business of $13,000, multiplies that amount by the number of months from the accident to trial, and deducts the actual revenue received from the business during that time. The arithmetic produces approximately <damage type = "other">$29,000</damage> from which the plaintiff suggests the sum of $7,500 is properly deducted to account for the closing of the Granville store, hence producing the <damage type = "other">$21,500</damage> claimed.
197  The defendant submits the circumstances of this case disclose no loss and no award is warranted. She points to the increase in the plaintiff's income from UPS in the years 2013 and 2014 from <damage type = "other">$5,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$9,000</damage> in 2010 and 2011, implying that the plaintiff was working longer hours and therefore less able to devote time to the delivery business. Perhaps more telling, the defendant points to the plaintiff's own records respecting the delivery income in the years 2010 to 2014 and, in particular, the plaintiff's notation with a "G" on those records for income received from the Granville store. That notation appears beside the vast majority of the entries and, if accurate, would seem to indicate that 90-95% of the delivery income was generated from the Granville Street store, the store that went out of business in early 2015.
198  Mr. Dzumhur clearly lost some income from his delivery business as a result of the accident. He made no deliveries in the three-month period following the accident. Deliveries resumed thereafter but not at the same pace as before. Mr. Faizi, the manager of the Bombay store in Richmond Centre, testified that he was forced to replace the plaintiff as a result of his absence following the injury, that he reduced subsequent work assignments to him because of his difficulties following the accident, and that, but for the accident, he would have continued using the plaintiff for the delivery work from the Richmond Bombay store.
199  The majority of the delivery income certainly appears to have been derived from the Granville Street store. That store's closure was not related to the accident so no claim is possible for the loss of that business. The plaintiff acknowledged he made no effort to find any other customers for his delivery enterprise. The assertion that, but for the accident, the plaintiff would have done so, must fail. The demise of the Granville Street store would likely have also resulted in the demise of the delivery business.
200  In 2011 the plaintiff earned almost <damage type = "other">$15,000</damage> from his Bombay store deliveries and he was on track to earn a similar amount in 2012 but for the accident. His loss for the three months following the accident is reasonably assessed in the gross amount of <damage type = "other">$3,600</damage>. No adequate explanation arises from the evidence for the decline in business from the Granville store in 2013 and 2014 but it is reasonable to assume it was at least partly caused by the plaintiff's injuries and inability to perform some of the heavier work. Doing the best I can on the evidence and in fairness to both sides, I assess the additional loss arising from or related to the delivery business in the gross amount of $5,000.
201  One other element to the claim for past loss of capacity must be considered. The plaintiff testified, and I accept, that were the delivery business ever to fail, he would have exercised his option of becoming a full-time driver at UPS to make up for that loss of income. With the demise of the Granville Street store in early 2015, I find the plaintiff could have and, but for the injury, would have applied for such full-time employment at UPS. This would have increased his employment income, although the precise amount is unclear and, indeed, the mechanics and timing of any transition to full-time work were not fully developed on the evidence. This is, however, a classic "loss of capacity" claim based on a real and substantial possibility. Mr. Madsen, the UPS vice president at Vancouver, actually offered the plaintiff the opportunity to become a full-time driver but the latter declined because of his medical problems and inability to physically perform the additional work.
202  I discuss the arithmetic respecting income differentials based on full-time and part-time employment in the next section of these reasons. Suffice it to say I assess damages for the plaintiff's inability to work as a full-time driver for the period March 2015 to the date of trial in the gross amount of $8,750.
203  The parties agreed at trial that any loss of gross income from the delivery business should be reduced by 20% for expenses that would have been incurred and a further 22% for "netting" on account of income tax. The loss of income related to the delivery business is therefore determined to be the net sum of $5,366 rounded to $5,400 and from the plaintiff's loss of income from full-time work at UPS in the amount of $6,825 rounded to $6,800.
Future loss of earning capacity
204  A bewildering array of case law addresses both entitlement to and the quantification of claims by personal injury plaintiffs for loss of future earning capacity. In the past five years alone, our Court of Appeal addressed the subject in over 65 cases. While some of the pronouncements in these cases can confuse, particularly when taken out of context, a discrete, two-step process is clearly required:
the court must determine whether, as a result of the injuries sustained in the accident, the plaintiff's present or future earning capacity has or will be impaired such that there is a substantial possibility of a future loss of income on the plaintiff's part; and
if so, the court must then assess on a present value basis what compensation should be awarded for that future financial loss.
205  The first question deals with entitlement and the second with quantum.
206  The basic goal of tort law is to restore the injured plaintiff to the position he or she would have been in but for the defendant's negligence, at least insofar as a monetary award is capable of doing so. This requires the court to compare the likely future of the plaintiff's working life if the accident had not happened with the plaintiff's likely future working life after the accident. In the 1978 trilogy, the Supreme Court of Canada itself referred to the exercise as "crystal ball gazing" inasmuch as it involves an inquiry into future events. However, it must be more than mere speculation; it must be informed speculation firmly grounded in the evidence and the particular facts of each case. The standard of proof for such future events is not the traditional "balance of probabilities" applicable to most civil cases; rather, future or hypothetical possibilities will be taken into consideration so long as they are real and substantial.
207  For example, in Perren v. Lalari, , the plaintiff suffered soft tissue injuries and her symptoms were likely to continue on a chronic basis. These injuries prevented her from being competitively employable in any position that required heavy or repetitive work. However, the plaintiff was employed and was likely to remain employed by the provincial government in a management position that did not require any heavy or repetitive work. There was no real possibility that the plaintiff would have turned to any such employment in the future and hence the plaintiff could not demonstrate a real possibility that she would suffer a loss of income as a result of the diminishment of employability. The trial court awarded <damage type = "other">$10,000</damage> as a modest amount for loss of earning capacity but the Court of Appeal overturned the decision based on the absence of proof of a real and substantial possibility of future pecuniary loss. Mere inability to perform an occupation that is not a realistic alternative occupation is not proof of a future loss and so the claim failed step one of the two-step analysis.
208  Step two, the assessment of appropriate quantum, is usually the more challenging task. In Meghji v. British Columbia (Ministry of Transportation and Highways),  at para. 81, the court observed:
It is correct to say that an award of damages under this head [loss of future earning capacity] is a result of the careful weighing of all the evidence and the application of considered judgment to that evidence. It is not a calculation [citation omitted]. Because the court is required to take into account all substantial possibilities it is necessary to use careful judgment in weighing those possibilities.
209  In the Perren case, the court noted two different approaches, both said to be correct, to the assessment of future loss of earning capacity: the "earnings approach" and the "capital asset approach". The former is said to be more useful "where a demonstrated pecuniary loss is quantifiable in a measurable way" (Perren at para. 12). The latter approach was said to be "more appropriate where the loss, though proven, is not measurable in a pecuniary way", although the court did not elaborate on the actual mechanics of its application (Perren at para. 12).
210  In Rosvold the court stated:
The task of the court is to assess damages, not to calculate them according to some mathematical formula: [citation omitted]. Once impairment of a plaintiff's earning capacity as a capital asset has been established, that impairment must be valued. The valuation may involve a comparison of the likely future of the plaintiff if the accident had not happened with the plaintiff's likely future after the accident has happened. As a starting point, a trial judge may determine the present value of the difference between the amounts earned under those two scenarios. But if this is done, it is not to be the end of the inquiry. The overall fairness and reasonableness of the award must be considered taking into account all the evidence.
...
The assessment of damages is a matter of judgment, not calculation.
(paras. 11, 18)
211  In Jurczak v. Mauro,  at paras. 36-37, the court noted some mathematical calculation may aid in quantifying a loss, but no particular formula applies:
[The] process is "an assessment rather that a calculation" and "many different contingencies must be reflected in such an award": [citation omitted] ..."ultimately the court must base its decision on what is reasonable in all of the circumstances. Projections, calculations and formulas are only useful to the extent that they help determine what is fair and reasonable": [citation omitted] and
With that said, if there are mathematical aids that may be of some assistance, the court should start its analysis by considering them.
212  In Schenker v. Scott, , the court noted that comparisons to awards in somewhat similar cases are of limited utility in assessing damages for awards of future loss. Rather, the trial court must make a "reasoned analysis to explain and justify the award" rather than simply adverting to the governing principles and then "plucking a number from the air". In that regard the court recommended at paras. 53-55, 70:
the findings of fact in the case should be expressly related to the actual assessment of damages;
the court should undertake a "clear analysis of whether [the plaintiff] proved a substantial possibility of future income loss derived from [his/ her] diminished marketability [or other components of any loss of earning capacity]";
"[m]athematical, statistical or economic evidence, where available, may be of assistance in assessing damages";
the court should provide an "explicit analysis of the general level of earnings [the plaintiff] would have realistically achieved, but for the accident, taking into account [his/her] intentions and the probabilities of achieving them";
this should be followed by a "projection of [the plaintiff's] likely future earnings taking into account [the] injuries and other relevant contingencies";
as part of this last step, if the court concludes that the plaintiff may have to accept less than full-time work in the future as a result of her his or her injuries, the court must assess the probability of that occurring and the extent to which the plaintiff will be restricted to such part-time work; and
if parties provided the court with expert evidence from economists to assist in the valuation of lost capacity, the court should explain its relevance and what use, if any, the court ultimately makes of it.
213  In Morgan v. Galbraith, , the trial court rejected the "earnings approach" to the assessment of damages in favour of the "capital asset approach" described in Brown v. Golaiy  (S.C). The latter, of course, is one of the two correct approaches identified in Perren. In Brown, the court set out several "considerations" towards assessing the "value" of any lost or impaired earning capacity including:
whether the plaintiff has been rendered less capable overall from earning income from all types of employment;
whether the plaintiff is less marketable or attractive as an employee to potential employers;
whether the plaintiff has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities which might otherwise have been open, had he not been injured; and
whether the plaintiff is less valuable to himself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market.
214  In my view, these factors more properly go to step one of the analysis referred to above, rather than quantification of damages. For sure, there is a dearth of authority explaining precisely how these considerations inform value (as opposed to the existence of a loss), although in the Morgan case the Court of Appeal stated:
If the assessment is still to be based on the capital asset approach the judge must consider the four questions in Brown in the context of the facts of [the] case and make findings of fact as to the nature and extent of the plaintiff's loss of capacity and how that loss may impact the plaintiff's ability to earn income. Adopting the capital asset approach does not mean that the assessment is entirely at large without the necessity to explain the factual basis of the award [citations omitted]
215  The "capital asset" approach was considered to have been triggered in Pallos v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia, , where the court concluded the plaintiff had permanent pain resulting from his injuries that limited his activities and his income earning capacity. The loss of capacity was found to exist even though the plaintiff was still employed by his pre-accident employer and would continue to be so employed indefinitely. The question was what award ought to have been made under such circumstances and how it should be assessed. The court stated:
The cases to which we were referred suggest various means of assigning a dollar value to the loss of capacity to earn income. One method is to postulate a minimum annual income loss for the plaintiff's remaining years of work, to multiply the annual projected loss times the number of years remaining, and to calculate a present value of this sum. Another is to award the plaintiff's entire annual income for one or more years. Another is to award the present value of some nominal percentage loss per annum applied against the plaintiff's expected annual income. In the end, all of these methods seem equally arbitrary. It has, however, often been said that the difficulty of making a fair assessment of damages cannot relieve the court of its duty to do so. In all the circumstances, I would regard a fair award under this head to be the sum of $40,000.
216  There is nothing in the judgment to indicate how the amount of <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage> was determined. To that extent the outcome might represent an example of simply adverting to the governing principles and then "plucking a number from the air" of the sort later criticized in the Schenker case.
217  I turn now to applying these legal principles to the facts of this case.
218  The plaintiff submits that the best measure of his annual uninjured income earning capacity is a combination of the average income earned from the delivery business for 2010 and 2011 combined with his pre-accident income from UPS (<damage type = "other">$55,000</damage> in 2014). He suggested <damage type = "other">$65,000</damage> per annum. Alternatively, the plaintiff submits that the proper measure should be the annual income derived from a full-time position at UPS, being a position the plaintiff was physically capable of handling before the accident and which he testified would be his intention should he ever lose his part-time delivery business. Mr. Khrod testified as to the rates under the new collective agreement with the UPS workforce, namely <damage type = "other">$21.88</damage> gross for part-time drivers as opposed to <damage type = "other">$27.64</damage> paid to full-time workers, essentially a <damage type = "other">$6</damage> difference. Mr. Khrod was not asked, nor did he testify as to the hourly rate that Mr. Dzumhur would qualify for should he convert his status from part time to full time.
219  The plaintiff suggests a baseline calculation of approximately <damage type = "other">$64,000</damage> (48 weeks x five days/week x nine hours/day x <damage type = "other">$28</damage> = <damage type = "other">$60,480</damage> + 6% holiday pay).
220  The plaintiff submits he is currently "losing" approximately <damage type = "other">$30,500</damage> per annum. This figure is derived from comparing a <damage type = "other">$64,000</damage> figure above with what is claimed to be the plaintiff's likely stream of earnings derived from continuing his part-time position i.e. <damage type = "other">$33,500</damage> (48 weeks x five days/week x six hours/day x $22 + 6% holiday pay = $33,500). Applying the "economic, contingencies-in" multiplier provided by the plaintiff's expert economist to this loss to age 65 generates "on a conservative basis" results in a future loss of earnings to age 65 with a present value of <damage type = "other">$240,000</damage>.
221  Plaintiff's counsel submits that given the plaintiff's age, his young family, the family's financial position, and the testimony of both the plaintiff and his wife, the plaintiff will need to work at least into his early 70s and perhaps longer. The plaintiff suggests that for the period from age 65 to the end of his working life, he will would no longer be with UPS and hence "it would be more appropriate to assess the plaintiff's loss of capacity on a capital asset approach rather than an earning approach".
222  In that regard counsel submits "the realistic chance of the plaintiff landing employment of consequence after leaving UPS is slim, particularly given his lack of Canadian education" and his history as a "one-employer employee". Therefore, counsel submits, "a reasonable assessment of the plaintiff's loss of capacity for the period from his 65th through, say, 73rd year would be another two years of his present notional income of <damage type = "other">$64,000</damage>, or <damage type = "other">$128,000</damage> rounded". That number obviously does not reflect any discounting to present value.
223  In other words, the plaintiff suggests the total value of his future loss of income earning capacity claim is <damage type = "other">$368,000</damage> before application of any additional contingencies.
224  With respect to contingencies, the plaintiff acknowledges that the future income multiplier (7.870 to age 65) of the expert economist already built in the contingencies for non-participation in the labour force, unemployment, part-time work, part-year work, and survival rates. However the plaintiff suggests a further negative contingency affecting the plaintiff is what was described in Morlan v. Bennett,  at para. 41, as "essentially ... a matter of common sense", namely that "constant and continuous pain takes its toll and that, over time, such pain will have a detrimental effect on a person's ability to work, regardless of what accommodations an employer is prepared to make".
225  The plaintiff also argues that Dr. Rickards' proposed panacea of MBB/RFR treatments is "mere speculation at its finest" in the circumstances of this case and that it is a "Hail Mary" pass deserving of no weight, whether as a contingency or otherwise.
226  For her part, the defendant did not address either calculations or contingencies but simply maintained that the plaintiff has not experienced any loss to date and will have no loss in the future. Quite apart from the beneficial impact of the MBB/RFR treatments, the defendant points out correctly that the assumption of the plaintiff working only 30 hours per week is contrary to the available evidence in his timesheets from UPS. Those timesheets record that in the period from March 2015 through the beginning of July 2015, the plaintiff worked approximately 30 hours a week on only two occasions, whereas for the vast majority of the time his hours ranged from approximately 36 to 48 per week. This pattern of work is similar to the four-week pattern of hours worked by the plaintiff in May 2012, the month before the accident, and no loss has occurred at present nor should any loss occur in the future.
227  I have already concluded that but for the accident in this case, the demise of the plaintiff's furniture delivery business meant he would have become a full-time employee of UPS in the spring of 2015. Similarly, I have already concluded that the pain and physical difficulties arising from the plaintiff's current medical condition continues to effectively prevent him from becoming such a full-time employee. While the MBB/RFR procedures will likely result in some improvement of the plaintiff's chronic pain, as set out above, the plaintiff will likely continue experiencing some degree of chronic pain and will unlikely be limitation/restriction-free. I therefore approach the assessment of loss of future earning capacity on the basis that the plaintiff will continue as a part-time driver for UPS, however I propose a significant contingency to allow for the real and substantial possibility that future MBB/RFR treatments will reduce the plaintiff's pain and related physical activity restrictions to such a degree as to allow for full-time work. This permits an "earnings approach" as opposed to a "capital asset" approach to assessing the loss, at least until age 65.
228  As indicated earlier, the plaintiff was fit, strong and healthy before the accident. Because of this, he likely would have been capable of working as a UPS driver until age 65 notwithstanding the physical nature of the work. However, the assumption that the plaintiff would have continued such work into his late 60s and early 70s is unrealistic. Rather, at age 65 he probably would have sought out somewhat less physical work on at least a part-time basis to supplement available government pension income.
229  What, then, is the difference in income to age 65 between a full-time position at UPS and the plaintiff's part-time position? Mr. Khrod testified as to the differential in the top hourly rates (an approximate 30% difference of <damage type = "other">$6</damage>) and the range of holiday pay but not as to what rate the plaintiff would initially be paid if he became a full-time employee. The range of rates paid to full-time employees was not identified in the evidence. Mr. Madsen testified that full-time drivers are guaranteed eight hours of work a day and can work as much as nine to 12 hours. Drivers are paid at the overtime rate if they work more than eight hours on any given day or more than 40 hours in any given week. However no evidence was provided respecting the average annual income of the full-time drivers generally or of any part-time driver who has converted to full-time status.
230  In my view, a fair base figure to employ for any arithmetical "loss of earnings approach" to assessment in this case is <damage type = "other">$15,000</damage> per annum. This reflects the difference between full-time work and continued work on a part-time basis at almost the same level of hours as before the accident (as actually corroborated by the most recent UPS timesheets). It also approximates the annual amount earned (and since lost) by the plaintiff from his delivery business in the recent years before the accident. It is a number approximately equivalent to 30% of the plaintiff's 2013-2014 UPS income. It is a reasonable figure to assign to his annual loss in all the circumstances of the case.
231  I have employed the <damage type = "other">$15,000</damage> annual loss as the basis for calculating the award for past loss of earning capacity in para. 202 of these reasons. For the purposes of future loss of capacity assessment, however, and employing the "economic, contingencies-in" present value multiplier of 7.87, the present value for the future loss of this income stream to age 65 is approximately <damage type = "other">$118,000</damage>.
232  As stated in Rosvold, this is not the end of the inquiry. The overall fairness and reasonableness of the award taking into account all the evidence as well as any additional contingencies that may apply must still be considered. Some contingencies which spring to mind include:
the possibility that Dr. Rickards' prognosis is actually realized, that the MBB/RFR treatment does indeed eliminate or improve the plaintiff's pain condition such that he can assume full-time work, whether a year from now or some other time;
the countervailing possibility referred to in the Morland case of continued pain taking its toll and reducing the plaintiff's ability to continue even part-time work at some time in the future;
the possibility that, whether as a result of economic recessions similar to 2008 or otherwise, UPS might choose to scale back or even eliminate operations in Vancouver such that the plaintiff may find himself seeking less remunerative employment elsewhere.
233  In my opinion, the first contingency is the most significant. Dr. Rickards' own recovery is a testament to the efficacy of the procedures he advocates and while Dr. Caillier has not known patients who are completely pain-free as a result of the procedures, she does acknowledge they are often effective at least in reducing mechanical back pain.
234  The case law instructs that real and substantial possibilities are weighed according to the percentage chance of their occurrence in light of all the evidence. Frankly, determining such percentages in this case is an almost impossible task and certainly little evidence has been tendered to inform this part of the analysis. It truly is "crystal ball gazing" of a non-scientific nature. Meghji urges the court to apply considered and careful judgment in weighing possibilities but there is no formula for that exercise. In many cases, such weighing is often nothing more than speculation informed by the Court's sense of fairness based on experience, common sense and what has occurred in other similar cases.
235  In all the circumstances, it is my judgment the aforementioned <damage type = "other">$118,000</damage> should be reduced by approximately 25% to reflect the cumulative, offsetting values of the contingencies in question. Hence, the amount I award for loss of future income earning capacity to age 65 is <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$85,000</damage>.
236  That is not the end of the matter; the claim for loss of earning capacity on the plaintiff's part after the age of 65 must be considered. The plaintiff suggests a "capital assets" approach that would see an award equivalent to two years' salary. No rationale is provided for that number and while it is certainly true as noted in Pallos that some courts have awarded amounts equivalent to one or more years of lost salary, the origins and rationale for such amounts is usually unstated and is difficult to discern.
237  The two-step analysis referred to above is still applicable. The first question is whether as a result of my findings as to the future impact of the plaintiff's injuries there is a substantial possibility that he will lose the opportunity to earn income in his late 60s/early 70s that he would otherwise have been able to enjoy. If so, then the present value of that loss has to be determined.
238  Commonly, in many of these personal injury cases, the parties adduce expert evidence respecting vocational aptitude and physical capacity evaluations, statistics related to workplace demographics and occupational trends, economic forecasting, and the like. Such evidence might possibly be the basis for some informed speculation as to what any particular plaintiff, or at least a similar demographic cohort, might do in the future in terms of employment activities beyond the "traditional" retirement age of 65.
239  No such evidence was presented in this case. I have already found that the plaintiff is capable and will continue to be capable of work notwithstanding his injuries. He suggests he has a "slim realistic chance" of landing "employment of consequence" after leaving UPS "particularly given his lack of Canadian education". No evidentiary basis was tendered for these propositions nor, indeed, for an evaluation of any such "loss" arising from same.
240  Having said that, I agree common sense dictates that a person living with some level of ongoing pain, even if manageable, has a meaningful possibility of being less able to earn income in the future. This is true whether the condition cumulatively takes its toll on a person's ability to work, or whether the condition makes a person less attractive to potential employers. These are realistic and substantial possibilities that could very well have a detrimental effect on the plaintiff's ability to earn income after age 65. This situation is thus more akin to Pallos than Perren.
241  In the result, some award for loss of income earning capacity past the age of 65 is warranted. The problem is determining how much. There is simply no evidence, expert or otherwise, before me that permits any informed analysis. But I do not think it would be fair to simply dismiss this claim outright. Rather, I am inclined to award a modest amount in recognition of the possible future loss in that regard in the sum of <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$15,000</damage>.
242  In the result, the total award for loss of future earning capacity in this case is <damage type = "future wage loss">$100,000</damage>.
SPECIAL DAMAGES
243  Special damages have been agreed between the parties and the amount of <damage type = "special">$2,087.05</damage>. I award that amount under this heading together with appropriate court order interest at registrar's rates.
COST OF FUTURE CARE
244  The principles applicable to the assessment of claims and awards for the cost of future care might be summarized as follows:
the purpose of any award is to provide physical arrangement for assistance, equipment and facilities directly related to the injuries;
the focus is on the injuries of the innocent party... Fairness to the other party is achieved by ensuring that the items claimed are legitimate and justifiable;
the test for determining the appropriate award is an objective one based on medical evidence;
there must be: (1) a medical justification for the items claimed; and (2) the claim must be reasonable;
the concept of "medical justification" is not the same or as narrow as "medically necessary";
admissible evidence from medical professionals (doctors, nurses, occupational therapists, et cetera) can be taken into account to determine future care needs;
however, specific items of future care need not be expressly approved by medical experts... It is sufficient that the whole of the evidence supports the award for specific items;
still, particularly in non-catastrophic cases, a little common sense should inform the analysis despite however much particular items might be recommended by experts in the field; and
no award is appropriate for expenses that the plaintiff would have incurred in any event.
See Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd., ; Krangle v. Brisco, ; Milina v. Bartsch  (S.C.), aff'd  (C.A.); Aberdeen v. Langley Township, ; Gregory v. ICBC, ; Jacobsen v. Nike Canada Ltd.  (S.C.); Penner v. ICBC, ; Shapiro v. Dailey, .
245  Dr. Caillier testified that exercise is the key to managing chronic pain. She recommended five to six sessions per year with a kinesiologist to ensure an appropriate exercise regimen is in place and varied as necessary. She also recommended access to a gym environment for the rest of the plaintiff's life.
246  Dr. Rickards agreed with Dr. Caillier's recommendations respecting conditioning and exercise.
247  The expert economist provided a report to the court setting out future cost of care present value multipliers. No challenge was made to that report.
248  The claim for kinesiology costs is based on the amounts charged for the pre-trial kinesiology sessions undertaken by the plaintiff pursuant to Dr. Caillier's earlier recommendations. No challenge is made to those costs. The present value of those costs is <damage type = "sub-future care">$1,421.59</damage>, which is reasonable and is the amount I award under this heading.
249  The defendant contests the plaintiff's entitlement to any award for gym membership, pointing out that the plaintiff has not actually purchased any such membership in the past and therefore almost certainly will not do so in the future. I disagree with this position. The plaintiff did not join a gym simply because he could not afford to. If an award is made under this heading, I am satisfied that the plaintiff will expend the monies for that purpose. I am also satisfied that such a gym membership is both medically justified and reasonable.
250  Evidence, admittedly hearsay, was tendered respecting the cost of various facilities in the vicinity of the plaintiff's residence in New Westminster. The numbers cited were not challenged and appear reliable. The court is, in any event, familiar with these sorts of costs as awarded in many other cases.
251  A reasonable annual cost for gym membership is <damage type = "other">$450</damage>. Applying the appropriate multiplier set out in Mr. Benning's report yields a present value of these future lifetime costs in the amount of <damage type = "sub-future care">$10,000</damage> (rounded), which is the amount I award under this heading.
252  The next item relates to the costs associated with future MBB/RFR treatments. The plaintiff took the position that if such costs are to be awarded, then it should be on the basis of the cost of private health care. He cited Engqvist as authority for the proposition.
253  As indicated earlier, the defendant has since conceded not only that these treatments are warranted to help alleviate the plaintiff's chronic pain condition but also that the costs should be paid on the basis of private health care.
254  The plaintiff did not provide any submissions respecting the amount that should be awarded under this heading. The defendant submitted that the sum of <damage type = "other">$10,000</damage> would be appropriate.
255  In Villing the court stated:
[47] As to the cost of future care, the defence concedes the wisdom of allowing for the cost of one MBB procedure at <damage type = "other">$800</damage>, and one rhizotomy procedure at a cost of <damage type = "other">$7,000</damage>, in a private clinic setting so that Ms. Villing can be assured of at least one procedure before she graduates. In my view, given the evidence as to the length of wait times, it is appropriate to make allowance for two private rhizotomy procedures in the future. After that, the plaintiff may have a better idea of the effect of the procedure upon her, of how long the procedures will have an effect and her recovery time so that she can book future procedures well in advance, minimize the length of time she will have to be subject to recurring back pain while she awaits treatments and minimize the inconvenience of her schedule being disrupted. I allow the sum of <damage type = "other">$14,800</damage> for private procedures.
256  I agree with these observations and find them equally applicable to the present case. I award the sum of <damage type = "sub-future care">$15,000</damage> for future private MBB/RFR treatment procedures.
257  The total award for cost of future care is therefore <damage type = "other">$26,421.59</damage> rounded to <damage type = "future care">$26,500</damage>.
SUMMARY
258  In summary, I award damages to the plaintiff in the following amounts:
Non-pecuniary general damages: <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$ 85,000.00</damage> 
Past income loss <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">4,000.00</damage> 
Past loss of earning capacity: <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">12,200.00</damage> 
Loss of future earning capacity: <damage type = "future wage loss">100,000.00</damage> 
Special damages: <damage type = "special">2,087.05</damage> 
Cost of future care: <damage type = "future care">26,500.00</damage> 
TOTAL: <damage type = "total">$229,787.05</damage> 
259  Court ordered interest is awarded at registrar's rates on all awards for pecuniary loss to the date of trial.
260  Costs will follow the event unless there are any particular circumstances that should be brought to my attention, in which event the parties may make further submissions in writing within 30 days.
N.P. KENT J.
End of Document
Evans v. Keill, [2018] B.C.J. No. 3274
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
Matthews J.
Heard: April 16-20 and 23-27, 2018.
Judgment: September 25, 2018.
Docket: M152181
Registry: Vancouver
[2018] B.C.J. No. 3274   |
Between Crystal Evans, Plaintiff, and Sunni Keill and Wendy Abbott, Defendants
(226 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Body injuries — Back and spine — Neck — Soft tissue — Head injuries — Headaches — Psychological injuries — Depression — Action by plaintiff for damages suffered in 2013 motor vehicle accident allowed — Plaintiff's vehicle was struck from behind by defendants' vehicle — Plaintiff alleged accident caused headaches, migraines, neck pain, back pain and mental illness — Plaintiff suffered soft tissue injuries to mid-back, upper back, neck and shoulder — Plaintiff's pain improved by 60 per cent but plateaued — Plaintiff was left with chronic pain in neck and upper back — Plaintiff awarded total damages of $982,020.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Cost of future care — Special damages — Past loss of income — Employment income — Expenses and expenditures — Therapy or rehabilitation — Non-pecuniary loss — Pain and suffering — Affecting mobility — Affecting social relationships — Affecting recreational activities — Prospective pecuniary loss — Action by plaintiff for damages suffered in 2013 motor vehicle accident allowed — Plaintiff suffered soft tissue injuries to mid-back, upper back, neck and shoulder — Plaintiff was left with chronic pain in neck and upper back — Injuries impacted plaintiff's ability to work and significantly curtailed her social relationship and physical activity — Plaintiff awarded $110,000 for non-pecuniary loss — Plaintiff awarded $116,089 for past loss of income, $510,000 for loss of future earning capacity and $140,000 for pension loss — Plaintiff awarded costs of future care of $71,299, <damage type = "sub-general">$20,000</damage> for re-training and special damages of $24,632.
Action by the plaintiff for damages for injuries suffered in a motor vehicle accident in July 2013. Plaintiff's vehicle was struck from behind by a vehicle owned by the defendants. The plaintiff alleged that the accident caused severe headaches, migraines, neck pain, back pain and mental illness that permanently interfered with her ability to do physical work and required her to limit her recreational and social pursuits. She also sought damages to compensate her for expenses relating to treatment and vocational retraining. At the time of the accident, the plaintiff was 34 years old. She worked as a produce manager at a grocery store earning $29 per hour. She had a sick time allowance which was paid out to her if not used, a pension plan, extended medical benefits, and dental coverage. The plaintiff was physically active prior to the accident, hiking and attending yoga classes. She liked to socialize with friends and co-workers. The plaintiff was off work after the accident. She was unable to perform her job upon her return and was demoted. She lost her life insurance and disability benefits because she could not work the requisite hours. The plaintiff increased her hours despite ongoing pain in order to avoid getting fired. She accepted a voluntary severance package in June 2015 and stopped working. After the accident, the plaintiff stopped exercising and socializing. She began drinking heavily. The plaintiff took other employment but missed work frequently due to her pain and headaches. The defendants did not dispute liability or that the plaintiff's injuries were caused by the accident. They argued that the plaintiff failed to mitigate her losses with regard to her work. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 The plaintiff suffered soft tissue injuries to her mid-back, upper back, neck and shoulder. She had chronic pain in her neck and upper back. The pain was exacerbated by lifting and many different postures, including sitting, standing, certain neck angles and some yoga postures. The plaintiff experienced headaches and migraines. Over the course of two years after the accident the pain gradually improved by about 60 per cent but plateaued at its present level. It was permanent and not likely to improve. Due to the accident injuries, the plaintiff suffered two major depressive episodes and somatic symptom disorder. She withdrew socially from her friends. She attempted suicide twice and drank excessively. Non-pecuniary damages were assessed at <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$110,000</damage>. The plaintiff lost six weeks of work after the accident and lost income from her demotion. Damages were awarded for past income loss in the amount of <damage type = "past wage loss">$116,089</damage>. The plaintiff had a real and substantial possibility of future income loss. She was not employable in her pre-accident position and she had not found replacement work that she was capable of doing that pays an equivalent amount. Applying a capital asset approach, the plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "future wage loss">$510,000</damage> for loss of future earning capacity. The plaintiff's loss of pension benefits was assessed at <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$140,000</damage>. She was awarded <damage type = "sub-general">$20,000</damage> for the costs of re-training. The plaintiff required ongoing physiotherapy and. The cost of future care was assessed at <damage type = "future care">$71,299</damage>. The plaintiff was awarded a further amount of <damage type = "special">$24,632</damage> for special damages including Botox injections, physiotherapy, massage therapy, active rehabilitation, pain medications, and other medical costs relating to the accident. The total damages award was <damage type = "total">$982,020</damage>.
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: E.A. Poyner, A.E. Jackson.
Counsel for the Defendants: A. Du Plessis, M. Jeftic.
Reasons for Judgment
MATTHEWS J.
I. Introduction
1  The plaintiff, Crystal Evans, seeks damages for neck, upper back and psychological injuries in this claim for damages for personal injuries arising out of a motor vehicle accident. She alleges that these injuries caused severe headaches, migraines, neck pain, back pain and mental illness that permanently interfered with her ability to do physical work and required her to limit her recreational and social pursuits. She also seeks damages to compensate her for expenses relating to treatment and vocational retraining.
2  The defendants, Sunni Keill and Wendy Abbott, are the driver and owner, respectively, of the motor vehicle which hit Ms. Evans' motor vehicle from behind. Ms. Keill and Ms. Abbott do not dispute liability for the action or for the injuries that Ms. Evans submitted were caused by the accident. Rather, Ms. Keill and Ms. Abbott dispute the extent of the injuries and whether the injuries were solely caused by the accident or were, with regard to her mental health issues, pre-existing the accident. Ms. Keill and Ms. Abbott argue that Ms. Evans failed to mitigate her losses with regard to her work. They submit that this failure to mitigate should be taken into account in assessing her past income loss and future loss of earning capacity.
II. Issues
3  The issues are:
What injuries were caused by the accident and what is their prognosis?
Did Ms. Evans fail to mitigate her losses:
by taking a buyout of her position with Canada Safeway ("Safeway");
by resigning from her position with Telus; or
by retraining to be a chef?
What are Ms. Evans' likely future employment and earnings prospects?
Taking into account the answers to the above questions, what is the appropriate award for damages for:
non-pecuniary damages;
past income loss;
loss of future earning capacity;
loss of pension;
cost of future care;
cost of vocational retraining; and
special damages?
III. The Accident Injuries and Prognosis
4  The facts that I set out are my findings except where I indicate that there is a contest about the facts. In such cases I will set out the conflicting evidence and my findings.
A. Pre-Accident Background
5  Ms. Evans was born in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan on November 22, 1978. She grew up in Sherwood Park, Alberta. She was one course short of graduation when she left high school. She has never achieved high school graduation. She was 34 years old at the time of the accident and 39 years old at the time of trial.
6  After leaving high school, Ms. Evans was been consistently employed until two years after the accident. Since her early twenties, she has been employed in the banking and credit industry the retail industry, specifically for Safeway.
7  In 2002, Ms. Evans and her then partner, Bradley Parker, moved from Alberta to British Columbia. At that time, Ms. Evans was working for Household Finance. She transferred from their Edmonton branch to their North Delta branch.
8  In 2004, Ms. Evans resigned from her position with Household Finance. She applied to Safeway and was hired as a grocery clerk at the Robson Street store. She transferred to the Caulfeild Village store, and then to the Davie Street store where she worked from 2009 up to and after the time of the accident.
9  At the time of the accident, Ms. Evans held the position of produce manager. She belonged to the United Food and Commercial Workers Union, Local 158. Her employment wages and benefits were provided for by a collective agreement.
10  Ms. Evans testified that she enjoyed her work with Safeway and she did well in the positions she held up until the accident. Some of her co-workers testified to this, as did her one time supervisor, Mr. Shoring. He testified that she was one of the strongest produce managers under his supervision and one of the few women in that role in his area. Her performance reviews were strong. In 2012, the year before the accident, her performance was rated as exceeding expectations in all categories but one. Ms. Evans was proud that she had attained a position of responsibility and good pay despite not having graduated from high school.
11  At the time of the accident, Ms. Evans was earning <damage type = "other">$29.02</damage> per hour. She worked 40 hours per week. She had four weeks of holiday per year and a benefit she described as "accumulated time off": four hours of time off for every 40 hours worked. This generally amounted to five weeks off per year in addition to her four weeks of holiday. She had a sick time allowance which was paid out to her if not used, a pension plan, extended medical benefits, and dental coverage.
12  As produce manager, Ms.Evans supervised between five and ten employees per shift, depending on how busy it was. A typical shift involved several hours of physical work receiving produce which could include pushing or pulling heavy pallets; stocking the produce department which could include lifting produce of up to 50 pounds; and lighter duties such as scheduling shifts and ordering produce.
13  In 2005, Ms. Evans and Mr. Parker were married. In 2009, they divorced. Their parting was amicable. They shared a residence for two years following their divorce and they remain friends.
14  Prior to the accident, Ms. Evans was physically active. She hiked two to three times per week with a friend, including the Grouse Grind and Lynn Loop. She attended yoga classes. Her job was also physically demanding and required her to lift up to 50 pounds frequently and regularly.
15  Prior to the accident, Ms. Evans socialized with friends with whom she hiked and with other friends and co-workers. In addition to socializing through physical and recreational activities, she liked to get together with friends informally or to go out for dinner. She drank socially. She testified that she had no problems with alcohol abuse prior to the accident.
B. The Accident
16  On July 18, 2013, Ms. Evans was driving home from work at the Davie Street Safeway store. She was driving north on Capilano Road in North Vancouver and took the eastbound exit to Highway 1. As she prepared to merge with highway traffic, she came to a stop behind another eastbound vehicle in traffic. She was struck from behind by Ms. Abbott's vehicle which was being driven by Ms. Keill. The force of the impact dislodged her rear-view mirror and retracted her sunroof cover.
17  The day after the accident, Ms. Evans had severe pain in her neck, back and trapezius muscles. She went to work but could not perform her duties due to the pain. She saw her family doctor, Dr. Love, that day. He noted significantly reduced range of motion and diagnosed soft tissue injuries to her cervical spine and trapezius muscles. He prescribed Ibuprofen for swelling, Emtec-30 for pain, icing and physiotherapy. He directed that she be on medical leave from work given the physical demands of her position as a produce manager.
18  Ms. Evans started physiotherapy at the end of July 2013 and attended physiotherapy thereafter to control her symptoms. The frequency has varied based on her ability to afford the therapy and her symptoms. Ms. Evans has also sought out massage therapy and chiropractic treatment at various times since the accident. She has received hundreds of such treatments.
19  In addition to the pain in her back, neck and trapezius muscles, Ms. Evans suffered from headaches, some of which were accompanied by nausea, dizziness and vomiting, as well as pain in the backs of her eyes. These headaches would last for a few hours to a few days.
20  Ms. Evans testified that her injuries affected her sleep because they caused her to wake in the night with pain. She often felt fatigued in the morning.
i. Affects of Accident on Safeway Work
21  Ms. Evans was off work for six weeks. She returned to work on a gradual basis, starting with restrictions that she not lift and that she only work four hours per day. Ms. Evans did that but found that she often came home from work with pain in her neck and upper back and often had a throbbing headache. Dr. Love advised her to reduce her work to allow for days off between shifts to recover and seek treatment. Ms. Evans followed this advice.
22  In October 2013, Ms. Evans wanted to increase her work. Dr. Love permitted her to work four hours a day, five days per week on light duties. Ms. Evans also tried some light lifting at work but she continued to experience neck pain and headaches. She discontinued lifting and went back to four hours per day, three days per week.
23  In December 2013, Ms. Evans tried light lifting at work because it was the Christmas season and she felt pressure to work at greater capacity. She did so against Dr. Love's recommendation. She experienced neck pain and headaches.
24  In February 2014, Ms. Evans again tried lifting with the same results. This pattern of trial and setback continued over the first half of 2014. In August 2014, ICBC provided for an occupational therapist who drafted a graduated return to work program. That program anticipated that she would lift up to 40 pounds (20% less than her job requirement of 50 pounds) and work eight hours a day, five days a week by the end of October 2014. Ms. Evans was willing to try it. She encountered problems with neck pain and headaches when lifting 30 pounds. Dr. Love reduced her lifting restriction to 20 pounds.
25  Around this time, in September 2014, Safeway demoted her from produce manager to grocery clerk and transferred her from the Davie Street store to the Caulfeild Village store.
26  As a grocery clerk, her hourly wage was <damage type = "other">$25.41</damage>, a 13% reduction from her previous hourly wage. She was no longer eligible for her annual 20% bonus. She was not entitled to the accumulated time off benefit. Her vacation time was no longer four weeks but a percentage of hours worked. She lost sick day benefits as well as her life and disability benefits. Although the grocery clerk position had exactly the same physical requirements as the produce manager position, there was not enough work for her in the produce department within her restrictions and the situation was increasing the workload for other staff.
27  Mr. Hogeweide, the manager of the Caulfeild store, gave evidence that enough work could be found for her in the grocery department. He said they did provide her with work that was lighter. Ms. Evans disputes this. She testified that when she was working in an area and light duties had been exhausted, she was required to do whatever work was needed regardless of whether it was within her restrictions. On some days she was lifting or moving crates of soft drinks. On some days she was assigned to work in the dairy section, one of the most physically demanding positions in the store. She was scheduled to work the night shift which involves constant lifting and re-stocking shelves. She did not complain because she wanted to get her produce manager job back, and to do so she had to prove she could do the physical job requirements of the grocery clerk job which were the same as those of produce manager.
28  Mr. Cristofferson, a co-worker, testified that Ms. Evans was scheduled to work in the dairy from time to time. He was aware of this because he worked in the dairy and he was particular about how the work was done so he made it his business to know who was scheduled there. Mr. Hogeweide did not schedule Ms. Evans work so his knowledge of where she was working was restricted to what he noticed when they were on shift together. I accept Ms. Evans' evidence about the nature of work she did as a grocery clerk.
29  Ms. Evans grieved the demotion. However, her union representative advised her that after discussions with Safeway, the union viewed the accommodation as reasonable until such time as she could work the produce manager position without restrictions. This evidence came from Ms. Evans and is hearsay. I accept this evidence as being what she was told. The facts show that the union did not pursue the grievance.
30  On November 30, 2014, Ms. Evans' life insurance and disability insurance benefits were cancelled because she had not maintained an average of 32 hours of work per week.
31  In early December 2014, Ms. Evans received Botox injections or her neck pain and headaches on the recommendation of Dr. Love. She paid for the treatments privately in order to expedite them. The first set of injections was successful and enabled her to work a good part of the very busy Christmas grocery season without exacerbating her neck pain and headaches. She had a second set of injections in January 2015 which did not provide any relief and her headaches returned. Dr. Love recommended that she decrease her work to six hours every second day.
32  At this time, Dr. Love was of the opinion that Ms. Evans was going to have to change her work because despite several attempts to increase her lifting capabilities and her working hours, she was still suffering from pain and headaches affecting her ability to work. He recommended that she consider a change in employment to a less physically demanding job.
33  In March 2015, Ms. Evans was in a conundrum. The position to which she had been demoted, grocery clerk, required the same physical abilities as the produce manager position, except that as a produce manager, she was able to delegate heavy lifting and was therefore better able to manage her symptoms. Safeway would not permit her to return to her produce manager position until she was cleared to work it without restrictions. Her union told her that it would not proceed with her grievance until she was able to work the position. She was highly stressed financially.
34  Ms. Evans went to Dr. Love and persuaded him that if she was medically cleared to return to full duties, and was able to get back to the produce manager job where she could delegate heavy lifting, she would be better off both physically and emotionally. Dr. Love reluctantly acceded to her request to remove the restrictions on lifting and hours of work. Ms. Evans advised the Safeway rehabilitation specialist who was overseeing her return to work program that "I explained to my doctor that if I can lift the restrictions I may be able to get back my position, less lifting, so we decided to lift the restrictions. I'm hoping and excited to get back as a produce manager." Safeway did not accept this approach. Safeway Human Resources Director Dave Robertson told Ms. Evans that until she could work full time hours consistently, Safeway would not consider other work for her.
35  Ms. Evans increased her work schedule from 32 hours to 40 hours per week. She testified that her neck ached and her headaches worsened. She was resigned to not being able to work without pain and not being able to work as a produce manager. Ms. Evans testified that she was afraid she would be fired. The evidence of Safeway personnel who testified was that there were no plans to fire her and no one had threatened to fire her. I find that she was not in danger of being fired.
36  Meanwhile, Ms. Evans' long-term disability benefits, which paid 60% of the difference between her full time produce manager wage and her part time grocery clerk wage, were set to run out at the end of June 2015.
37  In June 2015, Safeway offered a voluntary severance package to long-term employees who held certain positions, including grocery clerks, as part of a downsizing program. It was not available to produce managers. The severance payout was <damage type = "other">$60,000</damage>. Ms. Evans accepted it and decided to retrain for another occupation. The package required her to work full time until September 5, 2015, but she was not required to do any duties that caused her discomfort. She met this criteria. At this time, she also started taking a course in wine appreciation as she was interested in working in the wine industry.
38  In July 2015, Dr. Love referred Ms. Evans to a specialist in rheumatology to consider trigger point injections and possibly Botox injections. Ms. Evans saw Dr. Badii for trigger point injections in 2016.
ii. Social, Recreational and Mental Health
39  After the accident, Ms. Evans stopped socializing and stayed at home to try to recuperate from her pain, headaches and fatigue from not sleeping.
40  Friends and co-workers testified that Ms. Evans stopped going out completely for a period of time after the accident. Then, several months after the accident, she began to make arrangements to go out but would often cancel them and explain that she had a headache.
41  One of these witnesses was Mr. Parker, Ms. Evans' ex-husband. He testified that he saw her less frequently following the accident. He attributes this to the headaches she told him that she was suffering from. He said that when he did see her she appeared to be uncomfortable and unhappy.
42  Ms. Evans was not physically active due to the accident until the spring of 2014. Due to her inactivity, she gained 30 pounds. This caused her to feel depressed and lowered her self-esteem. Friends who had previously hiked with Ms. Evans testified that she did not hike with them for the balance of 2013.
43  In addition, she began drinking heavily. She would often consume two bottles of wine in the evening which contributed to her feelings of depression. Mr. Parker testified that prior to the accident Ms. Evans was a social drinker who would consume four or five drinks in an evening. He described her drinking after the accident as out of control.
44  In the spring of 2014, Ms. Evans was dating someone. At this time, she said her mood was poor. She was drinking heavily. The individual whom she was dating broke off the relationship. Ms. Evans testified that after that time her drinking "took over".
45  On an evening in May 2014, Ms. Evans was at home and drinking alone. She took a handful of sleeping pills that had been prescribed to her and drank approximately two bottles of wine. She testified that when she swallowed the pills, her wish was to go to sleep and not wake up. She sent a message to a friend about what she was feeling. Her friend contacted the individual Ms. Evans had been dating. He came to Ms. Evans' apartment and stayed with her until she revived. Ms. Evans did not seek medical attention following that episode or report it to her family doctor because she was embarrassed and ashamed of what she had done. Ms. Evans testified that prior to this episode, she had never become depressed or sought to harm herself following the loss of a relationship, including at the time of her divorce in 2009. Ms. Evans testified that two years prior to the accident she had sought counselling due to issues she had with a relationship but she was not depressed at that time.
46  After the May 2014 incident, Ms. Evans took steps to improve her mental health. She attended a ten day meditation retreat and tried to learn techniques to relax. She found this beneficial. After the retreat, Ms. Evans slowly began trying to resume her recreational activities. She began to take yoga classes again but found that many of the poses aggravated her neck symptoms and caused headaches. She also attempted to start hiking again.
47  In 2014, she hiked the Stawamus Chief (the "Chief") with some friends. She was badly affected by pain in her neck and shoulders. She switched her backpack for a friend's waist pack, and continued the hike to the top. Ms. Evans testified that the steep downward portion was painful because she had to keep her neck angled to look down at her footing. One of her hiking friends testified that it was apparent that she was in pain especially hiking down the Chief. Another friend testified that Ms. Evans was faster going up than she was because she was in better shape.
48  She testified that she attempted to continue to resume hiking by doing occasional short and easy hikes on level terrain. She also purchased her own waist pack to use instead of a backpack.
49  The Safeway demotion further exacerbated her feelings of low self-worth and depression especially since it involved a transfer back to the Caulfeild store as a grocery clerk alongside people she had formally supervised when she was a produce manager. After the meeting during which she learned of her demotion, Ms. Evans said she went home, cried and drank. She was sad and depressed about having lost a job that she loved. She was worried about her finances. Ms. Evans had to move out of her one-bedroom apartment into a less expensive studio apartment. She caused herself to be socially isolated and continued to drink heavily.
iii. Post Safeway Buyout
50  After leaving Safeway in September 2015, Ms. Evans took a six-week holiday to recover from what she considered to have been a hard two years of rehabilitation and setbacks at work. She used her buyout money to finance that holiday, reduce her debt, and provide for retraining and job search costs.
51  When she returned from her holiday, she began working with a career counsellor to put together a curriculum vitae and to look for work. She made numerous job applications. In February 2016, she took a part-time job with Telus as a telephone customer service operator. The training was full-time and took place over several months.
52  In March 2016, Dr. Badii tried trigger point injections in her shoulder and upper back to address her pain and headaches. She had minimal lasting benefit from those injections and Dr. Badii did not recommend them further.
53  In June 2016, Ms. Evans completed her training with Telus and began working in the call centre. She was assigned more shifts than she anticipated. She found the work demanding and the breaks were not frequent enough to allow her to stretch. She was required her to sit or stand at a desk and wear a headset. During phone calls, she used a keyboard to take notes. She was not a proficient typist and had to flex her neck forward when typing to see the keyboard. There were no substantial opportunities to stretch or move around as the employees were only permitted a 30-second break between calls. She tried to alternate sitting and standing with no significant relief. Her neck pain, back pain and headaches were aggravated.
54  A co-worker testified that he worked near Ms. Evans and observed that she was in pain. Ms. Evans told him she had neck pain and headaches. In 2016, Ms. Evans tried hike the Chief again with this same Telus co-worker who had become a friend. She testified that despite wearing a waist pack, she had pain in her neck and back as well as a headache and was unable to carry on. She had to turn around and return to the bottom of the mountain shortly after the hike began. The rest of the group carried on and met her at the bottom afterward.
55  In July 2016, Dr. Love concluded that Ms. Evans was depressed based on her reporting to him that she was crying at home, had a decreased appetite, was having pain at work, and a four month relationship had broken up. He prescribed an anti-depressant, duloxetine, and suggested she see a psychologist for counselling. Ms. Evans saw a psychologist but did not find that session helpful.
56  In August 2016, Ms. Evans consumed a couple bottles of wine and took a number of pills. Once again she hoped to go to sleep and not wake up. Her ex-boyfriend took her to the hospital. The hospital referred her to the North Vancouver HOpe Centre, a mental health treatment centre, but Ms. Evans did not receive follow-up communication from the HOpe Centre despite seeking it out. She continued to see Dr. Love who refilled her prescription for duloxetine. Over the next few months her prescription was switched to venlafaxine as Ms. Evans was experiencing nausea from duloxetine. Ms. Evans reported to Dr. Nader, a psychologist she saw on two occasions, that she felt the medication helped to improve her mood and to reduce her overall level of negative emotions.
57  In the fall of 2016, Ms. Evans was still working for Telus, recovering from her suicide attempt, and living in North Vancouver. She met Greg Montgomery, and over the course of a few months, their friendship evolved into a romantic relationship. At the time, Ms. Evans was drinking heavily. Mr. Montgomery testified that when he met her she was drinking approximately a case of wine per week and her mood was depressed. He also noted that strenuous activity such as lifting, sitting or standing would trigger a headache for Ms. Evans for which she would lie down in a dark room and take pain medication.
58  In September 2016, Mr. Montgomery moved to California to take advantage of a job opportunity. Ms. Evans moved into his vacant apartment. Despite having hired movers for her belongings, Mr. Montgomery observed Ms. Evans carrying some small bags and boxes herself. He testified that this effort knocked her out for a few days with neck pain and headaches.
59  Ms. Evans and Mr. Montgomery maintained a long-distance romantic relationship and saw each other whenever Mr. Montgomery had occasion to return to North Vancouver from California.
60  In the summer and fall of 2016, Ms. Evans missed work frequently due to her pain and headaches. This prompted a talk from her manager at Telus. Ms. Evans explained that she had taken the job expecting it to be part-time but that she was working full-time hours. Her manager told her that she would look into putting her on a schedule of working evenings and weekends that would reduce her hours. Ms. Evans did not hear anything back from her manager on this issue. Ms. Evans wanted to transfer to another department but understood that Telus would not permit that to happen without her manager's consent, and given the extensive training that Ms. Evans had received, it would not be well-received for her to ask for a transfer until she had worked in the position for which she been trained for at least two years. After the meeting with her manager, and no response on her request to work part-time, Ms. Evans began to worry that she would be fired due to her frequent absences. In December 2016, she resigned from Telus.
61  In January 2017, Ms. Evans visited Mr. Montgomery in California. Ms. Evans had taken courses through the Wine & Spirit Education Trust ("WSET") in order to pursue work in the wine industry as a sommelier agent. During this visit to California, Ms. Evans developed an interest in working in the produce industry, and decided to combine her education in wines and spirits with becoming a chef.
62  Ms. Evans enrolled in a culinary institute specializing in raw vegan cuisine, which she testified was a niche area with a growing customer base in California. She had looked at other cooking schools and most required a year of full-time culinary studies. The school in which she enrolled permitted her to take several separate one-month courses to complete the course as a whole. She considered this to be more appropriate given her uncertainty around her physical limitations and culinary training. Unfortunately, she had an accident with a knife during the first level of the course. She had to postpone completion of the course.
63  In the meantime, Ms. Evans and Mr. Montgomery married. Ms. Evans then completed the first and second levels of the culinary course. She started the next level of course work but found it to be more physically demanding as it required a lot of standing time in the kitchen and postures with neck angulation that triggered pain and headaches. At the time of trial, Ms. Evans was working with a physiotherapist to strengthen her muscles with the aim of rejoining the course in June 2018.
64  Once she completes the full set of raw cuisine courses she plans to enroll in a more traditional culinary program which will involve a six-month culinary arts diploma and then follow that with a six-month baking and pastry arts diploma. Ms. Evans does not believe that restaurant cooking is feasible for her because it is physically demanding and requires significant lifting. However, she hopes that training as a chef will permit her to seek employment within her physical limitations such as being a private chef, running a catering company or teaching.
65  With the support of Mr. Montgomery, Ms. Evans has limited her alcohol intake to occasional glasses of wine when socializing. She testified that her mood is improved and her depression has gone into remission. She has given up hiking as she finds it places too much strain on her neck. She walks her dog on flat terrain for exercise. She attends physiotherapy and is undertaking strength training to try to improve her stamina.
C. Ms. Evans' Credibility
66  Before I address the expert evidence tendered by the parties, I will address the defence's argument that I must take into account that much of the evidence about Ms. Evans' injuries and the impact they have had on her comes from Ms. Evans herself.
67  There must be convincing evidence led by the plaintiff. It can be the plaintiff's own evidence, so long as the court is careful to scrutinize the evidence when there is no objective evidence available. As stated in Butler v. Blaylock,  (C.A.) at para. 13:
[13] ... It is not the law that if a plaintiff cannot show objective evidence of continuing injury that he cannot recover. If the pain suffered by the plaintiff is real and continuing and resulted from the injuries suffered in the accident, the plaintiff is entitled to recover damages...
68  In assessing credibility, I follow the approach described by Dillon J. in Bradshaw v. Jenner,  at para. 186, aff'd :
Credibility involves an assessment of the trustworthiness of a witness' testimony based on the veracity or sincerity of a witness and the accuracy of the evidence that the witness provides (Raymond v. Bosanquet (Township) ,  (S.C.C.)). The art of assessment involves examination of various factors such as the ability and opportunity to observe events, the firmness of his memory, the ability to resist the influence of interest to modify his recollection, whether the witness' evidence harmonizes with independent evidence that has been accepted, whether the witness changes his testimony during direct and cross-examination, whether the witness' testimony seems unreasonable, impossible or unlikely, whether a witness has a motive to lie, and the demeanour of a witness generally (Wallace v. Davis,  (Ont. H.C.); Faryna v. Chorny, [1952] 2 D.L.R. 152 (B.C.C.A.) [Faryna]; R v. S.(R.D.),  at para. 128 (S.C.C.)). Ultimately, the validity of the evidence depends on whether the evidence is consistent with the probabilities affecting the case as a whole and shown to be in existence at the time (Faryna at para. 356).
69  The defence argues that the nature of Ms. Evans' injuries must be assessed taking into account that there is no objective evidence of them, only Ms. Evans' subjective reporting. Aside from the fact that the law does not preclude recovery in such circumstances, I do not accept this argument on the facts of this case. There is evidence of several doctors as well as lay witnesses that is objective in nature.
70  For example, Dr. Waseem, a physiatrist seen by Ms. Evans, testified that he identified trigger points in her left paraspinal muscle which caused pain in her upper back upon palpation. He also observed spasms on both sides of the base of her neck and in her trapezius muscles in the region of her neck. The evidence includes co-workers and friends who saw signs of apparent pain in Ms. Evans and testified that she cancelled plans with them and withdrew socially.
71  In addition, Ms. Evans' evidence is acceptable on a credibility analysis following the approach and factors outlined in Bradshaw. Ms. Evans' actions corroborate her evidence of her injuries. She is a hardworking individual who attempted, for two years, to recover from her injuries and get back to the work she loved to do. She invested financially in the costs of treatment such that she fell into debt. She has missed days of work and she was demoted, losing a position that superior in terms of its financial compensation and the fulfillment she derived from it. She did not present as a person attempting to exaggerate her problems for financial gain. In the almost five years between the accident and this trial, she has behaved like a person trying to regain and then rebuild her life.
72  I find there to be corroborating evidence that Ms. Evans' pain and headaches were severe enough to cause her to not be able to work, socialize and engage in recreational activities as she reports. The sacrifices she endured to her financial well-being and her lifestyle are such that I find she has not exaggerated her symptoms. Her account of her injuries and the affects they have had on her makes sense and I accept it.
D. Expert Medical Evidence
73  Ms. Evans tendered the reports of the following medical experts: Dr. Love, her family physician (reports dated July 10, 2015 and July 28 2015), Dr. Heran, a neurosurgeon (report dated July 3, 2015); Dr. Waseem, a physiatrist (report dated August 13, 2015); Dr. Badii, a rheumatologist (reported dated July 28, 2017); and Dr. Nader, a psychologist (reports dated October 5, 2015 and June 26, 2017).
74  Ms. Evans underwent independent medical examinations at the request of the defendants. The defendants did not tender any reports.
75  The medical evidence is cohesive and not challenged on the following points:
Ms. Evans has soft tissue injuries to her neck, shoulder and upper back. The injuries have led to chronic myofascial pain which affects the muscles and muscle lining in the area of her neck, shoulders and upper back;
Ms. Evans initially had pain in her low and mid-back as well but that has completely resolved;
her myofascial pain has resolved somewhat, but it is chronic; and
she has had cervicogenic headaches (headaches originating in the muscles around the neck) as well as migraine headaches featuring severe pain, sensitivity to light, nausea and vomiting. The migraine headaches became less frequent over time.
76  The defendant takes issues with the medical evidence in the following regards:
the extent of improvement Ms. Evans had in the first two years following the accident and whether she will continue to improve;
whether Ms. Evans' facet joints are affected and part of her ongoing pain, and if so, whether all treatment options have been exhausted;
whether Ms. Evans should have passive rehabilitation as well as active rehabilitation or only active rehabilitation; and
whether Ms. Evans' psychological issues were due to relationship problems or the accident and whether the events described as suicide attempts were in fact suicide attempts, in particular the first event.
i. The Extent of Ms. Evans' Improvement
77  The debates about Ms. Evans' improvement are two fold. First, there is debate about whether she, by 2015, had daily neck and upper back pain and headaches, or whether she has some headache-free and/or pain-free days and was significantly improved by the summer of 2015. Second, there is a debate as to whether she may still improve.
78  Dr. Love contends that Ms. Evans is never headache free and pain-free and she has not had significant improvement. The defendants criticize Dr. Love as an advocate for Ms. Evans and argue that I should not rely on his evidence for much, if anything. Dr. Love knew Ms. Evans prior to the accident and saw her on a regular basis throughout her recovery. He provided two medical-legal reports, chronicling her visits, his advice and her progress. He testified at trial. In many respects, his opinions are similar to those given by the other medical experts. At times he reported that she was pain-free upon examination and at other times he reported marked pain. He testified about his involvement in her return to work attempts over the course of two years. At some junctures, he was reluctant to approve certain aspects of Ms. Evans' return to work plan but he supported Ms. Evans who wanted to keep her job and regain her position as a produce manager after she was demoted.
79  There are parts of Dr. Love's evidence which appear to be overstatements of Ms. Evans' pain status. When questioned on this in cross-examination, he became unreasonably insistent despite internal contradictions in his reports and contradictions with Ms. Evans' evidence. I accept that Dr. Love's objectivity has been impacted because of the position he has been trying to mediate between Ms. Evans' physical symptoms, which were exacerbated by lifting and working full-time hours, and her emotional state, which was impacted by feelings of depression around the loss of the work she loved as well as the financial stress of her demotion and reduced work hours. He became her advocate in her rehabilitation. He presented that way at trial on some issues.
80  There are certain elements of his evidence, mostly matters of degree, which I do not accept because they are in conflict with the other evidence that Ms. Evans put forward - including her own evidence.
81  An example is the evidence pertaining to the extent of her recovery, and in particular, whether she experienced about a 60% recovery by the summer of 2015 and whether she had pain-free days.
82  In July 2015, Ms. Evans saw Dr. Heran, a neurosurgeon, for an independent medical examination. Dr. Heran reported that at that time Ms. Evans reported that her accident symptoms had improved and she thought she was getting better over time. She said the pain had improved from being in her neck, trapezius, shoulders and arms to being really only in her neck and extending into the proximal trapezii. At that time she reported that she still got headaches. She reported that she was never pain-free but from time to time she was headache-free. She reported that the headaches typically occurred once or twice per week. Ms. Evans confirmed that this was her status at that time.
83  Ms. Evans also saw Dr. Waseem, a physiatrist, for an independent medical examination on July 28, 2015. Dr. Waseem reported that Ms. Evans told him that she had improved by about 60% and then plateaued. At that time, Ms. Evans reported to Dr. Waseem that her neck pain and her trapezius pain was present one half to three quarters of the time and her headaches occurred less than one quarter of the time. Ms. Evans testified that initially she had debilitating headaches five out of seven days per week. At the time she saw Dr. Waseem, she was having them less than one quarter of the time. She told Dr. Heran that she was having them one or two days per week. That is a reduction that corresponds well to a 60% improvement. This type of improvement was echoed with regard to neck and trapezius pain and Dr. Love's reports on her headache frequency.
84  Dr. Love also reported that in June 2017 Ms. Evans had a sore neck all day, every day and her trapezius muscles were sore all day every day. I note Dr. Heran reported in July 2015 that she was never pain-free from the neck and trapezius pain. If these statements are taken to represent her status during the whole of her recovery, they are contradicted by other statements in Dr. Love's reports and Ms. Evans' evidence at trial. She confirmed on cross-examination that when on holiday, for example, she had a pain-free week. She also agreed that when she was not doing something strenuous, she would not experience pain. I do not accept Dr. Love's insistence that Ms. Evans has had pain every day since the accident.
85  With regard to ongoing improvement, Ms. Keill and Ms. Abbott rely mainly on Dr. Heran's opinion that her soft tissue areas of pain would likely continue to improve. He felt that she should continue to further manage the pain with the treatment she was already using but she should also be re-integrating back into all aspects of her life including trying to lift and do activities at work. With regard to her headaches, he felt that the trigger point injections might be helpful. He also said there was room for consideration for management of the facet joints and for Botox injections. With respect to medications, he noted that in her condition there was a role for "neuromodulating medications". He thought she was borderline for implementing those at that time as she was able to tolerate her symptoms and manage her affairs by adjusting her activities. He felt that those medications should be considered if her symptoms were to worsen.
86  Dr. Waseem opined that her current symptoms were chronic myofascial pain syndrome involving the cervical spine as well as chronic post-traumatic headaches with mixed migraine and cervicogenic features. He noted that her conditions and symptoms have been "refractory" which means not resolved by spontaneous recovery, conservative therapy, or Botox injections, all of which had been tried before he saw her. He opined that the conditions were permanent in nature and her prognosis for full symptom recovery was guarded.
87  Dr. Badii opined that Ms. Evans has had her maximum medical improvement and now has chronic pain; she will always have a level of pain similar to her current level in her neck and shoulders; and she will continue to have cervicogenic headaches. He opined that her symptoms will be aggravated by strenuous physical activity and/or prolonged sitting. His view is that she should be able to work full time in a line of work that does not require prolonged sitting, keeping the neck in one position, or any significant degree of heavy lifting. He opined that Ms. Evans' pain is chronic and she needs to manage by adjusting her lifestyle accordingly. He reported that she has lower pain days, but she is rarely pain free.
88  Ms. Evans' physical symptoms have neither improved nor worsened since she saw Dr. Heran. It has been almost three years since he saw her. She had already tried Botox injections, and she subsequently tried trigger point injections without success. Dr. Badii did not think there was an indication that deeper facet joint injections (blocks) were warranted given the risks and the chances of only temporary relief. Dr. Badii treated her and I accept his opinion in this regard.
89  Dr. Love opined in July 2017 that after four years it was unlikely that she would improve and that she would have pain in her neck, in her trapezius muscles and cervicogenic headaches indefinitely.
90  I conclude that Ms. Evans' symptoms have improved. Fortunately, her headaches have reduced from most days of the week to between one and three days per week, depending on her activity. She has pain in her neck and upper back more than half the time. While this is an improvement from the first few months after the accident, it is chronic and regular, if not constant. The evidence was also clear that Ms. Evans experiences exacerbation of the pain and the onset of headaches when lifting, working with her arms over her head, or working with her neck flexed forward. I accept that Ms. Evans has some pain-free days and has headaches weekly but not daily. She reached that level of improvement by mid-2015. Her condition has not changed significantly since then and is not likely to.
ii. Facet Joint Injuries
91  Ms. Evans argues that Ms. Evans' ongoing pain stems at least in part from facet joint injuries. The expert evidence was inconsistent on whether or not Ms. Evans' ongoing pain stems primarily from soft tissue injuries, her facet joints, or both.
92  The evidence of Dr. Heran was that the difference between the two types of injuries is that soft tissue injuries settle down after they are aggravated, but facet joint injuries do not. He also opined that facet joint injuries can get worse over time. While this issue is important to the issue of whether her condition might deteriorate, it does not affect whether she can expect improvement. All the opinions are that she cannot work in occupations which keeping the neck fixed in one position, or any significant degree of heavy lifting and strenuous physical activities; she is only suited to strength activities of up to 10 pounds which essentially limits her to sedentary-light occupations; and she should avoid prolonged and sustained neck postures and repetitive cervical extensions and shoulder checks. These opinions are based on the nature of her pain, not the source of it.
93  Dr. Heran opined that Ms. Evans' pain was arising from both soft tissues and facet joints because the source of her pain on the left side appeared to be within the region of the facet joint complex. He recommended targeting her facet joint at the C4-5 level with injections with local anaesthetic and steroids for diagnostic purposes. He also felt she would benefit from facet joint blocks. He said, however, that where there is substantial overlap between the sources of pain, it can be impossible to tell even with injections.
94  Dr. Waseem diagnosed chronic myofascial pain and recommended cervical facet joint blocks to address Ms. Evans' cervicogenic headaches. In his testimony he explained that "blocking the joint" or "the nerve" can help treat headaches. He did not opine that her pain or headaches had a "structural" component as did Dr. Heran.
95  Dr. Badii treated Ms. Evans with injections. Dr. Badii tried trigger point injections in her neck with local anaesthetic and a corticosteroid. These are more superficial injections which Dr. Heran described as being for the soft tissue injuries and which, if offering relief, would assist in diagnosing a significant soft tissue injury component. Ms. Evans had minimal lasting benefit from those injections and Dr. Badii did not recommend them further. Dr. Badii stated in his report and on the stand that he thinks soft tissue injuries are the main source of Ms. Evans' pain.
96  Dr. Badii testified that based on the fact that neither Botox injections nor trigger point injections offered lasting or repetitive relief, he did not see a further basis for attempting other treatment modalities such as facet joint blocks or deeper injections. He considered them, but did not recommend them because he felt that her baseline pain, i.e. when her neck and back were not aggravated, was manageable for her. Facet joint block injections are deeper injections and carry with them risks of damaging blood vessels or nerves. The treatment does not provide permanent relief. At best if offers three to six months of relief.
97  Ms. Keill and Ms. Abbott argue that Dr. Badii's evidence should be interpreted to mean that Ms. Evans' facet joints were not affected. I agree. Dr. Badii's evidence, in his report and in oral evidence, was that he thinks her pain is mainly soft tissue related. While he did not definitively rule out the facet joints as a source of her pain, he also did not offer the opinion that they are a source of the pain or even mention them in his report. Dr. Badii treated Ms. Evans on four occasions. He was able to see her reaction to the trigger point injections.
98  In his second report, Dr. Love referred to Dr. Heran's opinion of left facet joint mediated pain and the potential for degenerative changes. Despite having seen that opinion, he offers the same opinion he had previously: that her pain arises from soft tissue injuries.
99  In my view, Ms. Evans has not proven facet joint involvement on a balance of probabilities.
iii. Recommended Course of Rehabilitation
100  Ms. Keill and Ms. Abbott argue that the medical evidence was that passive rehabilitation (physiotherapy, massage therapy, chiropractic treatment) will not have long-lasting benefits and are not reasonable expenses.
101  This argument is mostly based on the opinion evidence of Dr. Heran. He recommended Ms. Evans continue with active rehabilitation but did not think that passive modality treatments would be of value for long-term injury and pain management. However, he also opined that the passive modality treatments have been reasonable in the past and if they provided substantial benefit lasting from several to many days, they could still be considered.
102  Dr. Waseem and Dr. Love support the use of passive modalities such as physiotherapy and massage therapy to manage symptom exacerbation on an as required basis. Dr. Badii opined that 12 to 24 physiotherapy sessions a year for symptom control would be reasonable.
103  Ms. Evans has been attending passive therapy sessions including physiotherapy, massage therapy and chiropractic treatment since shortly after the accident as her finances have permitted. Within about two months of the accident, she began active rehabilitation. At present, Ms. Evans is using both active and passive modalities with a focus on strength-training to build up her endurance.
104  She had been prepared to invest in these therapies with her own funds, causing her considerable financial distress, because they offer relief.
105  I conclude that the weight of the opinion is that active rehabilitation should be Ms. Evans' focus, but that it is reasonable for her to use passive treatments to manage her symptomatology and that she is likely to require such symptom management on an ongoing basis.
iv. Psychological Injuries
106  The defence argues that Ms. Evans' suicide attempts coincided with her relationship breakdowns and those relationship breakdowns were the main causes of her major depressive episodes and suicide attempts.
107  In a personal injury case, the plaintiff must establish on a balance of probabilities that the defendant's negligence caused or material contributed to an injury. There must be a substantial connection between the injury and the defendant's conduct. The primary test for causation is the "but for" test: but for the defendant's negligence, would the plaintiff have suffered the injury?: Resurfice Corp. v. Hanke,  at paras. 21-23.
108  However, the defendant's negligence need not be the sole cause of the injury so long as it is part of the cause beyond the range of de minimus: Athey Leonati,  at paras. 13-17; Farrant v. Laktin,  at para. 9.
109  Where there are both tortious and non-tortious causes of injury, the defendant is liable so long as the defendant's conduct is a cause of the plaintiff's injury. The plaintiff must establish such causation on a balance of probabilities before damages are assessed: Blackwater v. Plint,  at para. 78.
110  As described above, after the accident Ms. Evans did not see friends as often as she previously did. She cancelled plans. She drank heavily. On two occasions she took pills after drinking large amounts of wine and hoped to go to sleep and not wake up. She was prescribed two different types of antidepressants. The second prescription helped her and in late 2016, with a combination of medication and other changes in her life, her mood improved. She drinks less and feels better.
111  With regard to her emotional distress and psychological condition, Ms. Evans tendered the medical evidence of an independent psychologist, Dr. Nader. In his November 2015 report, Dr. Nader opined that Ms. Evans met the diagnostic criteria for mild somatic symptom disorder, major depressive disorder in partial remission, and social anxiety disorder.
112  Dr. Nader opined that Ms. Evans' somatic symptom disorder was precipitated by her physical injuries and complaints following the accident. Somatic symptom disorder caused Ms. Evans to catastrophize and ruminate on the impact of her pain which was likely maintaining her distress about it. With regard to depression, Dr. Nader noted that she had not experienced significant depression symptoms prior to the accident. Dr. Nader opined that her psychological symptoms were most significant in the year following the accident and that in October 2015 she no longer met the diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder but had ongoing residual symptoms of depression. Her prognosis was cautiously optimistic. Having seen her after she had taken the buyout from Safeway, he raised concerns about her then current transition with regards to her work: he felt that if she had difficulty finding meaningful work in the next six to twelve months then she would be at a relatively high risk for relapse of her depressive symptoms and would benefit from psychological treatment. Dr. Nader also opined that her 2014 major depressive episode meant that she had a greater than 50% chance of experiencing another major depression and that psychological treatment may benefit to assist with her current symptoms and prevent future episodes of depression.
113  Ms. Evans saw Dr. Nader for a second time in June 2017. He opined that at that time, Ms. Evans no longer met the diagnostic criteria for somatic symptom disorder or major depressive disorder. He opined that Ms. Evans was more accepting of her pain and not as bothered by it. Her attention had shifted to how to function effectively within her physical limitations. He opined that she had suffered a second depressive episode in the summer of 2016 leading up to the second suicide attempt. Dr. Nader opined that her depression in the summer of 2016 was related to the fact that she had been optimistic and hopeful about starting her new job at Telus - in particular that it would help her get back on her feet financially - but that within a few months of starting the job she realized she would not be able to function at the job long-term and started having increasing headaches and worsening pain. This led to stress and caused her to question what she would be able to do for work in the future. This concern about her future, the stress of the job itself, and the relationship problems she had contributed to the worsening of her mood. Her previous major depressive episode increased her risk of this second depressive episode. Dr. Nader opined that her treatment with Effexor had gone well and she was not experiencing any significant depressive symptomology at the time of the examination and had not since September 2016.
114  Dr. Nader opined that her prognosis was cautiously optimistic. He opined that she should consider psychological treatment in the future should she notice a recurrence of depressive symptoms. However, he did not feel that she needed psychological treatment at that time.
115  In my view, the submission of the defendants that relationship break-ups were the cause of Ms. Evans' suicide attempts parses the evidence too thinly and ignores other evidence. Ms. Evans' evidence, as supported by evidence of friends and co-workers, was that was depressed after the accident. She was moody and irritable. She withdrew socially. Her evidence was that she was drinking heavily which had not been a problem for Ms. Evans prior to the accident. Prior to the accident she had endured a marital breakdown without a depressive episode.
116  I accept that the relationship breakdowns that immediately preceded her two post-accident suicide attempts played a role in her depression and suicide attempts. But I also accept that she became depressed as a result of her accident injuries, her loss of self-esteem due to not being able to do a job she had previously been very good at and derived a lot of self-worth from, her inability to engage in strenuous and challenging physical activity, her associated weight gain; and her inability to become and remain pain-free and headache-free.
117  I find that the accident was meets the but for causation test with regard to Ms. Evans' somatic symptom disorder, which caused her to dwell on and catastrophize her symptoms, her depression and her suicide attempts.
IV. Failure to Mitigate
118  Ms. Keill and Ms. Abbott argue that Ms. Evans failed to mitigate her past wage loss damages in the following ways:
taking a buyout from Safeway;
limiting her post-Safeway job search;
resigning from her position with Telus; and
choosing to retrain as an executive chef by taking vegan culinary courses.
119  In the result, they submit that past income loss should be limited to the losses up to when Ms. Evans left Telus and her loss of earning capacity damages should be reduced by 30% after reduction for negative contingencies.
A. Legal Principles
120  A plaintiff in a personal injury action has a positive duty to mitigate, including actively pursuing job opportunities. A failure to mitigate loss of income can be found on the basis of a lack of diligent efforts to find alternative employment: Graham v. Rogers,  at para. 82, leave to appeal dismissed, . The plaintiff is obliged to take reasonable steps to find employment at a level he or she reasonably could have been expected to achieve in light of the injuries suffered as a result of the accident: Midgley v. Nguyen,  at para. 282.
121  The defendant bears the burden of establishing on a balance of probabilities: (1) that there were steps the plaintiff could have taken to mitigate; (2) that those steps were reasonable; and (3) the extent, if any, to which the loss would have been avoided by taking those steps: Wright v. Mistry,  at para. 103, citing Lemieux v. Evers,  at para. 64. If the defendant establishes, on a balance of probabilities, that the plaintiff acted unreasonably, the determination as to the amount the plaintiff's damages would have been reduced as a result of him or her acting reasonably may involve hypothetical or future possibilities which the court will weigh according to the relative likelihood, where the possibility is real and substantial: Gill v. Lai,  at para. 73. In Power v. Carswell,  at para. 220, the Court described the defendant's burden as heavy.
122  With regard to the first two steps, while the analysis is focussed on whether the plaintiff's actions have been reasonable, the analysis is not purely objective. The court should take into account the subjective knowledge of the plaintiff regarding the proposed alternative employment: Gallina v. Honda Canada Finance Inc.,  at para. 129. If the injuries the plaintiff has suffered, for example psychological injuries or a brain injury, are at the root of the alleged unreasonable behaviour, it will be inappropriate to make a deduction for failure to mitigate: Mullens v. Toor,  at para. 123, aff'd , and Litt v. Guo,  at paras. 415-16.
123  A plaintiff is not being reasonable in circumstances where he or she is not able to undertake pre-accident employment and insists on pursuing a line of work which he or she likes but which is not reasonable because it does not offer good employment opportunities, will require lengthy retraining compared to an alternative option, or does not provide comparable income as an available reasonable alternative would: see, for example, Mullens at paras. 112-14.
124  Where the plaintiff does not take reasonable steps by pursuing employment that is not suitable, the trial judge, in assessing future loss of earning capacity, may take into account the earnings that would have been attained at reasonable employment, rather than from the employment the plaintiff has chosen to pursue. For example, in Odian v. Carriere, , the plaintiff could not work as a finishing carpenter due to her accident injuries, but was suited to work in the supervisory aspects of homebuilding. Medical professionals - an occupational therapist and a vocational expert - had recommended that course. Instead, the plaintiff decided to retrain as a bookkeeper. Mr. Justice Dley held that the plaintiff had established an entitlement to loss of earnings capacity, but compared her pre-accident earning capacity as a finishing carpenter with what she was deemed capable of earning post-accident as a homebuilder on modified duties, as recommended by the experts, rather than what she was capable of earning as a bookkeeper (see paras. 111-123). Dley J. also refused to award the plaintiff retraining expenses for the costs of retraining as a bookkeeper on the basis of the expert evidence that she was "best suited to continue as a home builder": Odian at para. 133.
B. Discussion
125  The evidence shows that Ms. Evans was not able to do her job at Safeway without an unacceptable level of pain even on a part time basis. She made genuine efforts to her detriment in exacerbating her pain and headaches. After two years of trying, it was clear that she was not going to be able to go back to her produce manager position or work as she had on a full-time basis.
126  Ms. Keill and Ms. Abbott argue that the fact that she worked full time during the month prior to leaving Safeway on September 15, 2015 proves that she was continuing to improve and if she had not given up her employment at that time, she could still be working full time for Safeway.
127  This positon is undermined by the factual evidence and the expert opinion evidence. The factual evidence demonstrated that when she worked full time with lifting and reaching duties, she exacerbated her pain and headaches. She was able to work the last month because she was told that in order to qualify for the severance package, she must be present at her job but was not required to do anything that made her uncomfortable. This was not a work arrangement that was available to her except to qualify for the severance package. The medical evidence was that she is not fit for physically demanding work and her recovery has plateaued. There was no evidence that supports the contention that if she had simply kept at it, she would be able to do the grocery clerk job full time.
128  Ms. Keill and Ms. Abbott also argue that there were other Safeway jobs available that were not physically demanding including positions in the meat department, in the flower department and in the bakery. Ms. Evans' evidence was that the flower department positions required employees to lift heavy buckets of water. The meat department and bakery were different union locals and paid less. In order to secure a position in these departments, Ms. Evans would have had to give up her seniority and her pay grade. With no seniority, she had a diminished ability to secure a position in these departments. Mr. Koehler, a Safeway store manager to whom Ms. Evans reported when she was the produce manager at the Davie Street store, testified that Ms. Evans was not eligible for such positions.
129  In addition, the defendants argue that in taking the buyout, Ms. Evans abandoned her grievance. They argue she should have taken a position in the meat department, floral department or the bakery and waited out the resolution of the grievance. The evidence from Ms. Evans was that there had been no activity on her grievance because the union was unwilling to pursue it unless she could physically do her produce manager job. As noted above, she had tried to "fudge" her way back into that job but Safeway did not accept that she could physically do the job.
130  Finally, Ms. Keill and Ms. Abbott argue that Ms. Evans' took the buyout for financial reasons. Ms. Evans agrees. Her inability to do her job had resulted in a demotion where her pay was cut. She was not able to work full time. Her long-term disability benefits made up part of the difference, but they were about to terminate at the end of June 2015. Due to her reduced pay and the costs of her therapy to rehabilitate, she had fallen into debt even though she had moved out of a one bedroom apartment into a studio apartment. She saw the <damage type = "other">$60,000</damage> buyout as a way to support herself through retraining.
131  At the time Ms. Evans left Safeway, her condition had improved and plateaued. I will review the evidence pertaining to Ms. Evans' vocational options with reference to her abilities and the medical evidence as of that time.
132  The physicians opined that Ms. Evans is capable of full time work so long as the position does not require heavy lifting (Dr. Waseem specified no more than 10 pounds); prolonged sitting; prolonged neck flexion; or strenuous physical activity (pushing, pulling and carrying). Although cross-examined, none of this expert evidence was undermined and I accept it.
133  Ms. Keill and Ms. Abbott focus on Dr. Heran's opinion that the soft tissue areas of pain would likely continue to improve. Dr. Heran stated "if major improvements are established with time, then she should be able to get back to her previous level of vocational functioning". This eventuality has not developed. On the evidence before me, I am of the view that it is not possible that Ms. Evans will be able to return to work as a produce manager or as a grocery clerk.
134  Ms. Evans tendered the expert reports of Mr. Jeff Padvaiskas, an occupational therapist who undertook a functional capacity evaluation of Ms. Evans in September 2015. He prepared a report after that evaluation and a supplementary report to take into account the lifting limitation of 10 pounds imposed by Dr. Waseem. He opined that the 10 pound strength limitation limits her to sedentary or limited strength occupations. The limits on neck posture and positioning impact her suitability for desk or computer based types of positions. He opined that if a position requires substantial sitting she should have ergonomic adaptations and/or intersperse her tasks to allow her to move around and take breaks.
135  On cross-examination, Mr. Padvaiskas agreed that Ms. Evans could do sedentary work involving sitting or standing as long as she has a good ergonomic set up. Regardless of sitting or standing, she is not suited to work with awkward positions, non-neutral neck and back positions or work involving reaching, lifting or having her arms loaded.
136  The parties relied on expert reports on vocational rehabilitation: Trevor Lesmeister for the plaintiff and Diane Cameron for the defendants.
137  Mr. Lesmeister opined that with Ms. Evans' limited education, including not graduating from high school and not having any other formal education, the loss of her ability to work in a physical capacity significantly narrows her pre-accident range of suitable positions. He provides examples of the type of work she can no longer consider such as a landscaper, housekeeper or painter.
138  Mr. Lesmeister opined that there are some suitable occupations within her pre-accident industry of retail such as a merchandiser, assistant store manager, or buyer. He opined that some of those may have physical requirements for which she would need accommodation. He opined it was not likely she would secure employment in these jobs.
139  Ms. Cameron criticized Mr. Lesmeister for ruling out work as a produce manager given Dr. Heran's opinion about the potential for improvement in her pain from her soft tissues injuries. For the reasons given above, I do not accept this to be a valid criticism. Ms. Cameron also opined that Ms. Evans is suited to retail management positions that are within her physical tolerances as they are categorized as limited strength requirements. Mr. Lesmeister's expressed the concern that notwithstanding the job classification of limited strength, some positions may involve carrying product or stocking shelves for which Ms. Evans would need accommodation. I agree with Ms. Cameron that this opinion is too sweepingly restrictive. Obviously, there will be some positions that are not suited to Ms. Evans, but there will be others that are.
140  Mr. Lesmeister opined precisely that later in his report when he gave some examples of occupations that are suitable such as retail sales:
While I note that Ms. Evans would be able to access these types of positions given her current education and functional limitations, there could be specific positions that had job demands that exceeded her physical capabilities. Therefore she would not be able to consider them as options and this would narrow the overall number of employment opportunities available to her.
141  Mr. Lesmeister opined that without further training, Ms. Evans is suited to work involving customer service such as retail sales, a casino worker or hotel front desk clerk. He opined that with further retraining she could improve her options to obtain a higher paying position (but not as high as a produce manager position), such as sales representative, event planner, retail supervisor or office administrator.
142  Mr. Lesmeister prepared a second report in which he was asked to provide an opinion on the suitability of Ms. Evans to participate in a one year culinary arts program. He opined that this would fit within her vocational capacity but he deferred to a functional capacity expert on the issue of whether she has the functional capacity to undertake such a program. Such an opinion was not proffered.
143  Ms. Cameron criticized Mr. Lesmeister for only providing the median hourly wages for the jobs he opined are open to Ms. Evans. Ms. Cameron provided the low, median and high wage rates for these positions. For some of these positions, the range between the low and high rate is so great that they do not add any meaningful information. Having said that, it is helpful to know the ranges for the purpose of addressing contingencies in loss of earning capacity as discussed below.
144  Ms. Cameron also disagreed with Mr. Lesmeister's opinion that Ms. Evans is more suited to shorter hands-on retraining programs of one year in duration or less. Ms. Cameron opined that Ms. Evans has the general learning ability for training programs up to two years in duration. In addition, Ms. Cameron criticized Mr. Lesmeister's choice of expensive retraining programs. However, admission to the Capilano University program that Ms. Cameron recommends requires grade 12 graduation and so is not suitable.
145  After leaving Safeway, in September 2015, Ms. Evans did not begin looking for replacement work for three months, 38 days of which was spent on an extended holiday. She then commenced working with a career counsellor to put together a curriculum vitae and look for work. She made numerous job applications in the retail area and the wine industry. She only had one interview. In February 2016, she was offered a part-time job with Telus as a telephone customer service operator. She took the position, even though it was not the type of job she wanted to do, so that she could support herself financially while she continued to consider options for a rewarding career.
146  A break from work to rehabilitate, consider future options and undertake a certain period of job hunting is reasonable. In my view, Ms. Evans' five month break and job search was too long. The evidence was that from the time she started searching for a job to the time she attained the Telus position was two months. I conclude that had she acted reasonably, she could have had a job within three months after leaving Safeway.
147  With regard to her employment at Telus, the defence argues that Ms. Evans resigned because she did not like the job, not because she could not do the job. They argue that the ergonomic accommodations at Telus were appropriate for her. They submit that it was unreasonable for her to leave a unionized job with benefits and a pension without having another job to go to. They submit that I should not accept that the job caused exacerbation of her neck pain and headaches because the evidence on the point is only that of Ms. Evans.
148  I have already addressed that I find Ms. Evans to be credible. I accept her evidence that she had increased pain because despite the ergonomic set up there were prolonged periods when her neck was flexed forward. Her evidence is supported by the evidence of a co-worker who witnessed pain behaviour, and her husband, who was a friend at the time, who saw that she was in pain after her shifts. He described that she would cancel plans because of it.
149  I also accept that the fact that Ms. Evans did not like the work at Telus played a role in her decision to resign. She took the job knowing it was not her preference but with a plan to find work that she would like while working part time at Telus. She was assigned full time shifts. She asked for part time shifts but there was no change. In my view, the fact that she was prepared to take a job that was not the type of work she wanted to do demonstrates that she is not trying to make the defendants pay for her to find a job she likes. I find that the exacerbation of her neck pain and headaches, the related onset of another depressive episode, and the fact that the work was full time so she had no break to recover and look for alternate work, were significant factors in her decision to resign. I find the decision to be reasonable.
150  Ms. Evans left Telus in December 2016. She has not worked since. Rather, she has been training to become a chef. There was a four month gap between leaving Telus and enrolling in her first raw cuisine, which she had to discontinue after the first month due to being injured by a knife. She completed the first course in July 2017. She took the second course and completed it in August 2017. She enrolled in the next course in January 2018, but had to discontinue that course due to neck pain and headaches. In that course, there was less classroom work and more kitchen work than the first two courses. She is working on rehabilitation with the goal to be able to complete the course in the summer of 2018. She then plans to take a final raw food course. Following that, she will take two courses in traditional culinary training. Her evidence was that once the training work became kitchen-oriented, she experienced a recurrence of neck pain and headaches. This is consistent with the evidence that even with an ergonomic set up at Telus, Ms. Evans found that she had neck and back pain due to the postures she needed to maintain and the pace of the work.
151  Ms. Evans testified that she does not think she will be able to work as a chef in a restaurant but believes she could be a personal chef or teach cooking. There was no evidence to demonstrate that type of chef work would accommodate her neck pain and headache issues.
152  Ms. Evans' damages claim are premised on the assumption that starting in January 2019, she will be in a position to seek employment as a chef. This assumes that she will not complete the traditional chef training because she will not finish her raw food training until some time in mid to late 2018.
153  Ms. Keill and Ms. Abbott argue that she has led no evidence about the earnings of a chef. It is true that Ms. Evans' evidence was simply that she felt there was a good niche for raw cuisine chefs in California. She has led evidence, through her expert economist, Mr. Benning, of chef wages in Canada. It is not clear on the evidence whether Ms. Evans plans to work in California or Canada but she plans to take all of her training in California.
154  On the issue of mitigation, I conclude that the defendants have shown that Ms. Evans has not acted reasonably since she decided to pursue becoming a chef given how much of the work inherently involves standing with a flexed neck posture. She started in a niche area, raw cuisine. Between leaving Telus in December 2016 and trial in April 2018, a period of 16 months, she has completed two months of coursework. She has another two months to complete. At the time of trial, she had discontinued her third course because of her neck and back pain. Given her experience with work that exacerbates her neck pain and headaches, it is not reasonable for her to think that more rehabilitation at this time will make this work feasible for her.
155  In their submissions, each party argued that the other bears certain evidentiary burdens that relate to mitigation that have not been met. Counsel for the defendants asserted that the plaintiff bears the burden on past income loss and loss of earning capacity, including proving what work she is capable of doing and what loss is occasioned. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the defendants bear the burden of proving failure to mitigate.
156  I accept that Ms. Evans bears the burden in proving what her losses are. For loss of past income and loss of earning capacity, that means showing the difference between what Ms. Evans would have earned had the accident not occurred, and what she has earned and/or how her capacity has been diminished. She is entitled to do that based on her theory of the case, which is that absent the accident she would have continued to work at Safeway as a produce manager and her earning capacity has been diminished by the difference between her career at Safeway and what she will earn as a chef. She has led evidence on all of these points.
157  I accept that the defendants bear the burden of proving failure to mitigate. As stated in Graham, at para 35:
Mitigation goes to limit recovery based on an unreasonable failure of the injured party to take reasonable steps to limit his or her loss. A plaintiff in a personal injury action has a positive duty to mitigate but if a defendant's position is that a plaintiff could reasonably have avoided some part of the loss, the defendant bears the onus of proof on that issue.
158  Proving Ms. Evans could reasonably have avoided some part of her loss requires demonstration that Ms. Evans failed to pursue reasonable opportunities available to her. The factual context is such that this exercise is necessarily hypothetical and a matter of considering possibilities. The vocational evidence led by both parties is evidence of what other options she could have pursued, as is Ms. Evans' own evidence, including her interest in retail work and the wine industry. The evidence as a whole discharges the defendants' burden to prove that there were reasonable alternatives to mitigate damages.
C. Conclusion on Mitigation
159  Ms. Evans has acted reasonably except with regard to the length of time she took to find replacement work after leaving Safeway and her efforts to retrain after leaving Telus, especially after she learned that chef work exacerbates her neck pain and headaches.
160  The vocational evidence was that Ms. Evans is suited to training programs of one to two years in length. I conclude that two years (24 months), including time for a job search, represents a reasonable vocational retraining period for Ms. Evans. The total time that Ms. Evans has been unemployed since leaving Safeway, excluding the time she worked for Telus, was approximately 21 months up to the time of trial in April 2018. Three additional months from trial exhausts the two year retraining period. This occurs in July 2018. As will be discussed below, Mr. Benning, her expert economist, calculated her loss of earning capacity assuming she commences employment as a chef in 2019. If she commences working in January 2019, her time to retrain and find a new job will have exceeded what I have concluded is reasonable by about six months. I will take two months into account when assessing her past loss of income and four months into account in assessing her loss of earning capacity.
V. Assessment of Damages
161  The fundamental principle of compensation in personal injury cases is that a plaintiff should receive full and fair compensation, calculated to place them in the same position as they would have been had the tort not been committed, insofar as this can be achieved by a monetary award: Lines v. Gordon,  at para. 167, citing Ratych v. Bloomer,  at 962-63.
162  This principle is accomplished by awarding damages for pecuniary loss in the amount reasonably required to permit a standard of living and day to day functionality that, to the extent possible, approximates what the plaintiff would have experienced but for the wrong they were subjected to. Non-pecuniary damages are assessed to compensate for pain, suffering, and loss of enjoyment of life both prior to trial and into the future having ensured that the pecuniary losses are appropriately compensated and will not erode the non-pecuniary damages.
163  In a trilogy of cases decided in 1978, the Supreme Court of Canada set a rough upper limit of <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage> (in 1978 dollars) for non-pecuniary damages based on the premise that pecuniary damages are fully compensated: Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd.,  at 261-62; Arnold v. Teno,  at 333-34; and Thornton (Next friend of) v. Prince George School District et al.,  at 270. In 2018, the rough upper limit, adjusted for inflation, is <damage type = "other">$382,681</damage>.
164  The premise on which the rough upper limit was set demonstrates that while the heads of damages are to be assessed individually, they are also interlocking. In particular, the future needs of the plaintiff must be met through the pecuniary awards so that the balance struck between restorative care awards and policy-driven non-pecuniary damages will be achieved.
A. Non-pecuniary damages
165  In Stapley v. Hejslet,  at para. 46, the Court of Appeal set out a non-exhaustive list of factors to consider when assessing non-pecuniary damages: age of the plaintiff; nature of the injury; severity and duration of pain; disability; emotional suffering; loss or impairment of life; impairment of family, marital and social relationships; impairment of physical and mental abilities; loss of lifestyle; and the plaintiff's stoicism.
166  I have concluded that as a result of the accident, Ms. Evans has suffered pain and a loss of enjoyment of life, which will continue into the foreseeable future and from which she is unlikely to ever fully recover.
167  As a result of the injuries she sustained in the accident, Ms. Evans suffered from soft tissue injuries to her mid-back, upper back, neck and shoulder. She now has chronic pain in her neck and upper back. The pain is exacerbated by lifting and many different postures, including sitting, standing, certain neck angles and some yoga postures. It is exacerbated by physical activities where her neck or back bears weight, or involves lifting or working with her arms above a certain height. She experiences headaches and migraines. Over the course of two years after the accident the pain has gradually improved by about 60% but has plateaued at its present level. It is permanent and not likely to improve. She has been prescribed analgesics and has taken over-the-counter medications to cope with her pain.
168  Before the accident, Ms. Evans' mood was good and she enjoyed being physically active and social. She hiked several times a week, sometimes with friends, and regularly did yoga. She had a career that she enjoyed and was justifiably proud of given her eligibility for further promotion and that she achieved it without graduating high school. Her injuries rendered her unable to do her job.
169  Due to the accident injuries, Ms. Evans suffered two major depressive episodes and somatic symptom disorder. She withdrew socially from her friends. She attempted suicide twice. She drank excessively.
170  Overall, Ms. Evans' life is very different from what she enjoyed prior to the accident. However, after a significant and challenging struggle, she has reworked her life into a place where she is happy.
171  The most significant of the Stapley factors in this case are Ms. Evans' age; the severity and duration of the pain; the impairment of her physical abilities; her associated loss of lifestyle; and the impairment of her relationships. Ms. Evans is relatively young. She was 34 years old at the time of the accident and she was 39 years old at trial. She faces the prospect of a lifetime of chronic pain and associated functional limitations. One of the most significant impacts of her injuries has been the impact on her ability to do her job as a produce manager, which she enjoyed and which was a source of pride.
172  It is typical for courts to consider cases in which the plaintiff has suffered injuries similar in nature and duration to those of the plaintiff in the case at bar. Such cases act as a guideline, but should not be used to develop a "tariff" for injuries of a certain type: Lindal v. Lindal,  at 637. Similar injuries may not have similar consequences for the injured person.
173  I considered the following cases relied on by Ms. Evans concerning the appropriate quantum of non-pecuniary damages: Alafianpour-Esfahani v. Jolliffe, ; Ashcroft v. Dhaliwal, ; Eccleston v. Dresen, ; Herman v. Paley, ; Leach v. Jesson, ; Morena v. Dhillon, ; and S.R. v. Trasolini, . Ms. Evans submits that the appropriate range for nonpecuniary damages is between $110,000 and $130,000. I have considered the cases relied on by the defendants: Lourenco v. Pham, ; Blackman v. Dha, ; Smith v. Moshrefzadeh, ; and Montgomery v. Williamson, . These cases produce a range of $54,000-$99,000 in 2018 index dollars.
174  In Stapley, the 51-year-old plaintiff was injured in a tractor accident. He suffered injuries to his upper back and neck including thoracic outlet syndrome, myofascial pain syndrome to his neck, and strain of ligaments in the thoracic section. He had chronic pain and permanent headaches. He continued to work at his very physical job with some modifications but would finish work in considerable pain. His ability to participate in recreational activities was curtailed but he continued to do some. The jury awarded him non-pecuniary damages of <damage type = "other">$275,000</damage> which the Court of Appeal reduced to <damage type = "other">$175,000</damage>. The Court of Appeal said that the case had special circumstances in that he was a rancher whose occupation was threatened by his injuries. If he could not work as a rancher, he and his family would lose their way of life and community. Had the case not had that feature, the appropriate award would have been <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage>. The plaintiff had thoracic outlet syndrome in addition to the physical injuries which were similar to the plaintiff in this case. He did not have psychological injuries or emotional upset like the plaintiff here. He was able to be more active recreationally. He was approximately 15 years older than Ms. Evans.
175  Scelsa v. Taylor,  also has similar features to the present case. The plaintiff was 43 years old at the time of trial and 40 at the time of the accident. The injuries and their sequelae are similar except for in two ways: in Scelsa the plaintiff had cervical facet arthroplasty (pain originating from facet joints); and the plaintiff's depression in that case was not as severe as the two major depressive episodes Ms. Evans has had. Mr. Justice Brown determined that an award of <damage type = "other">$125,000</damage> was fair and reasonable. In the course of doing so, he reviewed authorities where the plaintiff suffered from myofascial soft tissue injuries (some also included herniated discs or facet joint pain) and observed:
[234] ... The higher range of cases exhibit more intense iterations of depression such as social isolation or significant loss of social contact and an impact on significant other persons in the plaintiff's life such as children and spouses. Chronic myofascial pain, permanent or significant loss of work previously highly valued by the plaintiff and/or significant loss of earning capacity also mark cases in the range of <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage> or more.
176  The comments made by Brown J. in Scelsa are apt and apply to the consideration I have undertaken of the cases on which Ms. Evans relies.
177  I turn to the cases relied on by the defendants. In Lourenco, the plaintiff suffered ongoing chronic pain in her neck and upper back. There was no discussion of a psychological injury. The Court's discussion of its reasons for non-pecuniary damages, other than the causation issues, was very brief.
178  In my view, this case is an outlier. All of the cases cited by Ms. Evans involving chronic limiting pain of this type have awards above <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage> and all of the cases cited by the defendants have awards above <damage type = "other">$80,000</damage>.
179  In Blackman and in Smith, the plaintiffs' physical symptoms were similar to Ms. Evans', however in Blackman there was no mention of depression or psychological injury and in Smith there was a passing mention of counselling for depression but it did not feature significantly in the case. The Court awarded <damage type = "other">$80,000</damage> (<damage type = "other">$84,000</damage> in 2018 dollars) in non-pecuniary damages in both cases.
180  In Montgomery, the plaintiff had suffered severe soft-tissue injuries to his upper back and neck and aggravated a pre-existing condition in his shoulder. The description of his chronic pain and symptomatology from his physical injuries, including ongoing headaches, are very similar to this case. He had become irritable and socially withdrawn. The chronic pain, headaches and loss of sleep had a "depressive effect". But there was no medical evidence of a psychological injury and the description of the emotional and mood issues is much less severe than in this case. The Court awarded <damage type = "other">$95,000</damage>, which is <damage type = "other">$99,000</damage> in 2018 dollars.
181  In summary, some of the cases cited by Ms. Evans involve other injuries, such as thoracic outlet syndrome, disc herniation or facet joint arthroplasty, on top of chronic myofascial pain and psychological injuries. Most of the defendants' cases do not include cases where a psychological condition has been diagnosed and/or the chronic pain is not as functionally disabling as that experienced by Ms. Evans. The cases which are most similar are Stapley and Montgomery.
182  Having considered the Stapley factors and all the above authorities, I assess non-pecuniary damages at <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$110,000</damage>.
B. Past Income Loss
183  Past income loss is Ms. Evans' income loss from the date of the accident to the date of trial. As the evidence above demonstrates, the components of her past income loss include: the six weeks immediately following the accident when she was off work completely; the period of her attempt to return to work full time at Safeway where she was working less than full time hours as part of her graduated return to work as well as days during this time that she called in sick due to headaches and pain; her reduction in wages and associated loss of bonus and benefits when she was demoted from produce manager to grocery clerk; and the difference between what Ms. Evans would have been earning working full time as produce manager at Safeway and what she has earned since she took the buyout from Safeway, less her Safeway buyout of <damage type = "other">$60,000</damage>.
184  Ms. Evans introduced into evidence the expert report of Darren Benning, an economist who calculated past income loss among other things. The defendants did not introduce an expert report disputing Mr. Benning's calculations. Rather, the defendants focused on Ms. Evans' full time produce manager earnings versus her post-buyout earnings and argue, as already discussed, that Ms. Evans' decision to leave Safeway was not reasonable and her efforts to retrain and replace her income loss have not been reasonable.
185  Mr. Benning's calculation of her after tax losses were about <damage type = "other">$4,750</damage> per month in the months she had no income. He calculates her total pre-trial loss, taking into account her Telus earnings over 10 months, to be <damage type = "other">$115,089.00</damage>. Had she retrained and commenced working after 3 months instead of after 5 months, she would have reduced her losses by something less than <damage type = "other">$4,750</damage> per month. I deduct <damage type = "other">$9,000</damage> for failure to mitigate in the pre-trial period.
186  I award damages for past income loss in the amount of <damage type = "past wage loss">$116,089</damage>.
C. Loss of Future Earning Capacity
i. Legal Principles
187  Assessing an award for loss of future earning capacity involves a comparison between the likely future of the plaintiff if the accident had not happened and the plaintiff's likely future after the accident has happened: Gregory v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia,  at para. 32. The assessment requires a very fact-intensive, case-specific inquiry; comparator cases are of limited assistance: Gregory, at paras. 32-33.
188  There are two widely used approaches to quantify loss of future earning capacity, the earnings approach and the capital asset approach. The distinction between the two was explained as follows by Mr. Justice Kent in Hoy v. Williams,  at paras. 156-59:
[156] ... The "earnings approach" will generally be more useful when the loss is easily measurable: Perren v. Lalari,  at para. 32. Where the loss "is not measurable in a pecuniary way", the "capital asset" approach is more appropriate: Perren at para. 12.
[157] The earnings approach involves a form of math-oriented methodology such as i) postulating a minimum annual income loss for the plaintiff's remaining years of work, multiplying the annual projected loss by the number of remaining years and calculating a present value or ii) awarding the plaintiff's entire annual income for a year or two: Pallos v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia  (C.A.); Gilbert v. Bottle,  at para. 233.
[158] The capital asset approach involves considering factors such as i) whether the plaintiff has been rendered less capable overall of earning income from all types of employment; ii) whether the plaintiff is less marketable or attractive as a potential employee; iii) whether the plaintiff has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities that might otherwise have been open; and iv) whether the plaintiff is less valuable to herself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market: Brown v. Golaiy  (S.C.); Gilbert v. Bottle,  at para. 233; Morgan v. Galbraith,  at paras. 53 & 56.
[159] Though the capital asset approach is not a "mathematical calculation", the trial judge must still explain the factual basis of the award: Morgan v. Galbraith,  at para. 56.
189  The defining distinction between the earnings approach and the capital asset approach is the extent to which the loss is measureable. If there is little or no evidence of what the plaintiff's post-accident earnings will be, the earnings approach may not be appropriate. Although the earnings approach is more mathematical, both approaches are a matter of judgment, not "mere calculation": Hosseinzadeh v. Leung,  at para. 126.
190  The earnings approach is often used where the plaintiff had an established earnings pattern or career trajectory prior to the accident, and after the accident the plaintiff continued to work in the same position with either reduced hours or modified duties, or took early retirement from that position as a result of accident-related injuries: see, for example, Riding-Brown v. Jenkins,  at para. 25.
191  The capital asset approach is used where there is a level of uncertainty making it difficult to measure the loss in a pecuniary way. As this Court stated in Riding-Brown at para. 26, this approach is "usually applied in situations where the uncertainty of the plaintiff's future renders quantification difficult."
192  The same two-step process is followed, regardless of whether the earnings approach or capital asset approach is used. First, the plaintiff must prove a real and substantial possibility that his or her earning capacity has been impaired: Perren v. Lalari,  at para. 32. Second, if the plaintiff discharges his or her burden of proof, the court turns to an assessment of damages.
193  Regardless of the approach taken, per Falati v. Smith,  at para. 41, aff'd , the general principles the court should apply when making an assessment under this head of damages are:
the court should assess damages rather than calculate them mathematically;
the standard of proof is not the balance of probabilities; the plaintiff need only establish a real and substantial possibility of loss, one which is not mere speculation, and hypothetical events are weighed according to their relative likelihood;
allowances must be made for the contingencies that the assumptions upon which an award is based may prove to be wrong; and
the overall goal of the assessment is to be fair and reasonable.
194  Turning to the assessment, I find that Ms. Evans has met the threshold test showing that she has a real and substantial possibility of future income loss. She is not employable in her pre-accident position and she has not found replacement work that she is capable of doing that pays an equivalent amount.
195  Ms. Evans argues that the earnings approach should be used and the court should compare her pre-accident Safeway earning capacity working as a produce manager until retirement (<damage type = "other">$1,223,000</damage> including benefits) with her potential earnings as a chef or as a wine sales representative. Ms. Evans submits that these numbers should be adjusted for contingencies that her opportunities within these industries will be limited and she will be less competitive for those jobs as against able-bodied applicants. She submits that an earnings approach assessment in this manner produces a range of damages of <damage type = "other">$634,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$720,000</damage>.
196  The defence argues the capital asset approach is appropriate, relying on Mullens. The plaintiff in Mullens worked in a bank at the time of the motor vehicle accident but left the bank to pursue retraining as a counsellor following the accident. The Court held that her decision to leave her work at the bank was "peculiar" and did not accept that she was not able to do that work. Further, if she was not able to work at the bank, the Court held she would not be able to complete the coursework and master's degree to become a counsellor. The Court applied the capital asset approach because the evidence of what work the plaintiff might do in the future was far too speculative, assessed a loss of earning capacity of <damage type = "other">$350,000</damage>, and reduced it by 50% for failure to mitigate.
197  Counsel for Ms. Evans argues this case is not similar because it was mostly about the plaintiff's "peculiar" decision, not supported by vocational evidence, to leave her pre-accident line of work. I agree. However, the reasons that the earnings approach was not applicable in that case are germane to this case. Although there was a substantial possibility that the accident caused income loss, the evidence as to what the plaintiff would do for work in the future was too uncertain.
198  As stated, Ms. Evans submits that the earnings approach should be based on a future career as a chef, which she prefers, or as a wine representative which she had thought of undertaking, and took some courses towards and then abandoned. In my view, neither of these options provides a sufficient evidentiary basis to take an earnings approach even on simple probabilities.
199  Although Ms. Evans' likely earning capacity if the accident had not happened is relatively easy to quantify, her likely earning capacity after the accident has happened is very uncertain. Accordingly, the capital asset approach is more appropriate in the circumstances.
ii. Application of the Capital Asset Approach
200  Four non-exhaustive factors from Brown v. Golaiy  at para. 8 (S.C.), form the basis of the assessment: Villing v. Husseni,  at para. 19-20. Those factors include whether:
the plaintiff has been rendered less capable overall from earning income from all types of employment;
the plaintiff is less marketable or attractive as an employee to potential employers;
the plaintiff has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities which might otherwise have been open to that plaintiff, had he or she not been injured; and
the plaintiff is less valuable to himself or herself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market.
201  Economic evidence provides helpful context to the application of the Brown factors by identifying in a general sense the magnitude of the plaintiff's loss: Dunbar v. Mendez,  at para. 20. In Dunbar, the Court of Appeal said:
[21] The assessment of future loss requires a court to estimate a pecuniary loss by weighing (even if not assigning specific numeric values to) possibilities and probabilities of future events and relating evidence and findings of fact to the quantification of the loss. ... The usefulness of economic and statistical evidence does not turn an assessment into a calculation. It does, however provide a useful tool to assist in determining what is fair and reasonable in the circumstances.
[Citations omitted.]
202  Even though the claim may not readily be measurable on an earnings analysis, earnings projections may provide a starting point for the assessment of the plaintiff's loss: O'Brien v. Cernovec,  at para. 143. Both positive and negative contingencies should be taken into account in the analysis.
203  Starting with the Brown factors, it is clear that Ms. Evans is less capable overall of earning income from all types of employment. Prior to the accident, she was suited to and did physical work. She is now only suited to work with restricted physical demands or sedentary work. The vocational evidence demonstrates that there are some positions she can do but she will require accommodations or a sympathetic employer. Accordingly, she is less marketable and attractive as an employee. Ms. Evans' former supervisor, Mr. Shoring, testified that he would have considered her for future promotions. The evidence establishes that Ms. Evans lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities which might otherwise have been open to her. Ms. Evans derived self worth and fulfillment from the way she did her job as a produce manager, from performance reviews, and from financial rewards, including annual bonuses she earned many years. She is less valuable to herself as a person in regard to her incoming earning capabilities.
204  I find that her future earning capacity is significantly reduced. Mr. Benning's unchallenged evidence is that had she continued working as a produce manager and earned a bonus every year (she had not earned one every year) her future lifetime earning capacity was <damage type = "other">$1,222,503</damage> including the value of her benefits.
205  One approach, considered in Mullens, is to compensate in an amount equal to a few years of income at the pre-accident salary. In this case, two years would be approximately <damage type = "other">$150,000</damage> and three years would be <damage type = "other">$225,000</damage>. In my view, that does not provide adequate compensation for her loss.
206  If Ms. Evans retrains and earns the median wage of the type of position Mr. Lesmeister sets out in his report and there is no bonus or benefits package, her income will be reduced by approximately 25%-35%. If she does not retrain but pursues the type of employment she is currently suited for, the reduction is greater. This approach does not fully take into account that her range of employment options is markedly narrowed. She is now very vulnerable to the vagaries of the employment marketplace. Given her lack of education, her ability to do physical work well was strongest asset to her in the employment market. She has lost that.
207  Based on all of the evidence, especially given that Ms. Evans is restricted to sedentary and limited strength work and she has a lost a position with excellent benefits, I find that her earnings capacity has been reduced by 40-50%. Applied to her lifetime future capacity, that provides a range of <damage type = "other">$488,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$611,000</damage>. I reduce this by <damage type = "other">$18,000</damage> for failure to mitigate.
208  I identify the following negative and positive contingencies:
Ms. Evans might achieve earnings higher than the median earnings for jobs for which she might retrain;
given Ms. Evans struggles with retraining as a chef, she might struggle in other occupations and be limited to part time work or work with accommodations, resulting in lower earnings and/or further restricted opportunities;
Ms. Evans might find a position with benefits equivalent to Safeway;
absent the accident, Ms. Evans might have been promoted at Safeway and increased her earnings; and
absent the accident, Ms. Evans might not have earned a bonus at Safeway every year.
209  In my view, these contingencies largely cancel each other out except the first one. Prior to the accident, Ms. Evans achieved earnings and work that exceeded what might have been considered to be her reasonable capability given her limited education. This cuts both ways. On one hand, she was able to do so because she excelled at physical work and she has lost that ability. On the other hand, her personality and drive were also responsible for her success. Her post-accident attempts to get back to her produce manager job demonstrate that she still has that drive. I find that if she applies her drive to finding work in an area to which she is suited, she will be successful and she will likely exceed the median wages for the type of work for which she is suited.
210  Taking all of this into account, I assess loss of future earning capacity at <damage type = "future wage loss">$510,000</damage>.
D. Loss of Pension
211  Mr. Benning calculated Ms. Evans' loss of pension at between <damage type = "other">$168,308</damage> and <damage type = "other">$170,821</damage> based on careers as a chef or wine sales representative. The defendant does not challenge these calculations. As I said, I cannot determine whether Ms. Evans will establish a career in either of these fields. However, it is apparent that she has suffered a significant loss of benefits, most particularly pension benefits, from her unionized position with Safeway. I conclude that it is unlikely, but not impossible, that she will replace her loss in this regard with a position with an equivalent pension. Future losses are a matter of simple probabilities, not an all or nothing perspective based on where a balance of probabilities lies. Taking into account the possibility that she may have some earnings that generate a pension, I assess her loss of pension at <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$140,000</damage>.
E. Costs of Retraining
212  To date, Ms. Evans has incurred <damage type = "other">$2,193</damage> in wine appreciation course expenses and approximately <damage type = "other">$14,618.75</damage> in raw cuisine culinary course expenses. The further raw food course she plans to take and the full year traditional culinary arts program will cost an additional <damage type = "other">$18,000</damage>, approximately.
213  The defence submits that the wine appreciation courses are reasonable but the raw food culinary courses and the traditional culinary course are not.
214  Ms. Evans' vocational consultant expert, Mr. Lesmeister, opined that Ms. Evans could consider retraining within a business-related program that would complement her previous employment experience. He opined that training for such positions can be completed on a full-time basis in a year or less. He provided an example of Sprott Shaw College which offered a 49 week Business Administration Management program at a cost of approximately <damage type = "other">$13,725</damage>. This would lead to positions such as a sales representative, an event planner, a retail supervisor or an office administrator, the median wages for which vary between approximately <damage type = "other">$18</damage> per hour and <damage type = "other">$24</damage> per hour. In his supplemental report, Mr. Lesmeister opined that a one-year culinary program would also be a reasonable choice for Ms. Evans. The Pacific Institute program which Ms. Evans identified costs between <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$41,000</damage> for a year of training consisting of two six-month courses.
215  Ms. Cameron opined that Ms. Evans is suited for retraining courses of up to two years in duration. She also opined that public programs, such as Capilano University, are much less expensive, however Capilano's program would require Ms. Evans to complete her high school graduation before being admitted. In my view, in the circumstances, this is not a suitable alternative.
216  Mr. Lesmeister recommends a course of vocational counselling costing in the range of <damage type = "other">$1,500</damage>-<damage type = "other">$2,000</damage>. Given my findings, I agree this is a reasonable expense.
217  Because of my findings that it is not reasonable for Ms. Evans to continue to pursue a career as a chef, and because the other courses of retraining are much less expensive than the raw cuisine course she has taken, the traditional course she plans to take or the Pacific Institute course, I assess her damages in this regard to be much more modest amount. I award <damage type = "sub-general">$20,000</damage> for the costs of retraining and vocational counselling, inclusive of the expenses she has already incurred.
F. Cost of Future Care
218  Ms. Evans seeks damages for cost of future care for physiotherapy and massage therapy; a gym membership; psychological counselling; occupational therapy; equipment; sleep posture aids; cold packs; and medication.
219  The defendants dispute the claim for the costs of physiotherapy and massage therapy. They argue that the cost of one of those two modalities is reasonable but both are not. If both are undertaken once per week the cost is <damage type = "other">$116,673</damage>.
220  I have found that the balance of medical evidence is that passive rehabilitation will continue to be reasonable to manage her symptoms and flare-ups. She has undertaken and obtained relief from both physiotherapy and massage therapy. Despite that they may not offer long-term improvement, it makes no sense to deny her the short-term relief they offer. In my view, that would be inconsistent with the approach mandated by Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd., at 241-248. However, I find that it is unlikely she will need to undertake both physiotherapy and massage therapy every week.
221  I award <damage type = "sub-future care">$50,000</damage> for physiotherapy and massage therapy. The total award for cost of future care is <damage type = "future care">$71,299.00</damage>
G. Special Damages
222  Ms. Evans has incurred a total of <damage type = "other">$40,719.28</damage> in expenses for Botox injections, physiotherapy, massage therapy, active rehabilitation, pain medications, and other medical costs relating to the accident. The defendants have paid <damage type = "other">$16,086.59</damage>.
223  Ms. Keill and Ms. Abbott dispute the physiotherapy expenses. They argue Ms. Evans' use of physiotherapy has been excessive. As discussed above, I disagree. Accordingly, I award the full net amount of <damage type = "special">$24,632.69</damage>.
VI. Conclusion
224  I award Ms. Evans damages as follows:
non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$110,000.00</damage>
past income loss : <damage type = "past wage loss">$106,089.00</damage>
loss of earning capacity: <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$510,000.00</damage>
loss of pension: <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$140,000.00</damage>
cost of retraining: <damage type = "sub-general">$20,000.00</damage>
cost of future care: <damage type = "future care">$71,299.00</damage>
special damages: <damage type = "special">$24,632.69</damage>.
225  The total is <damage type = "total">$982,020.69</damage>.
226  Subject to any matters of which I am not aware relating to costs, I award Ms. Evans costs at Scale B. If the parties wish to speak to costs, they shall, within 30 days of these reasons, contact the registry to make arrangements to do so.
MATTHEWS J.
End of Document
Eaton v. Regan, [2005] B.C.J. No. 240
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Victoria, British Columbia
Joyce J.
Heard: October 13, 2004.
Judgment: January 5, 2005.
Victoria Registry No. 005243
[2005] B.C.J. No. 240   |   2005 BCSC 3   |   137 A.C.W.S. (3d) 548   |   [2005] B.C.T.C. 3
Between Kenneth Eaton, plaintiff, and Randie Hayle Regan, defendant
(52 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — General damages — Categories of — Loss of enjoyment of life — For personal injuries — Considerations — Extent of incapacity — For personal injuries — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Loss of housekeeping ability — Non-pecuniary damages, including pain and suffering — Retroactive loss of income — Special damages — Limits on compensatory damages — Duty to mitigate — Physical injuries — Body injuries — Back — Neck — Head injuries — Headaches — Psychological injuries — Depression — Tort law — Negligence — Motor vehicles.
Application by the plaintiff, Eaton, against the defendant, Regan, to determine the quantum of Eaton's damages. Eaton was injured in 1998 when the vehicle he was driving in was struck by Regan's vehicle. Regan admitted liability for Eaton's loss and damages. Eaton suffered mild to moderate soft tissue injuries to his back, neck, and shoulders. These continued to cause him pain. He had a decreased interest in social and sexual activities. He also suffered from some reactive depression. He returned to work as a radiator mechanic in 1999 but subsequently missed some days of work and required assistance from co-workers for heavy tasks. He also submitted that he was unable to do as much housework as he previously did. Regan submitted that this case was not appropriate for determination under Rule 18A. He further submitted that Eaton had failed to mitigate his damages. 

HELD: Application allowed.
 Eaton was awarded damages of <damage type = "total">$53,902</damage>. The necessary findings of fact to assess the quantum of damages could be made and it would have been unjust not to proceed under Rule 18A. Regan had not proved that Eaton failed to mitigate his damages. Eaton was awarded <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$37,500</damage> in non-pecuniary damages for pain, suffering, and interference with his daily activities, including his recreational, family, and social pursuits. A past wage loss claim of <damage type = "past wage loss">$3,819</damage> was allowed. Eaton was awarded <damage type = "future wage loss">$10,000</damage> for loss of earning capacity. As a result of his injuries he required more assistance and had less strength and stamina at work. The loss of housekeeping capacity was compensated through his award of non-pecuniary damages. Eaton had not established that there were related future care costs and so no award was made under this head of damages. Eaton was also awarded <damage type = "special">$2,684</damage> in special damages representing the acquisition of a special bed.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
British Columbia Supreme Court Rules, Rule 18A.
Counsel
Counsel for Mr. Eaton: G.R. Jackson
Counsel for the defendant: F.D. Corbett
JOYCE J.
NATURE OF THE APPLICATION
1  On December 8, 1998 Mr. Eaton was injured when the pick-up truck he was driving was struck by the defendant's vehicle when the defendant, who was coming towards him, suddenly and without warning turned left directly in front of him. The defendant admits liability for Mr. Eaton's loss and damages.
2  Mr. Eaton brings this application under Rule 18A to determine the quantum of his damages.
SUITABILITY FOR DISPOSITION UNDER RULE 18A
3  The defendant submits this case is not appropriate for determination under Rule 18A. He submits there are differences in the evidence of the plaintiff's witnesses which he would wish to explore through cross-examination although he has not put forward any evidence that contradicts the plaintiff's evidence.
4  In my opinion this court is in a position to make the necessary findings of fact to assess the quantum of damages. In my view it is not unjust to determine the matter under Rule 18A. I consider it would be unjust not to do so for the following reasons.
5  The defendant has conducted a lengthy examination for discovery of the plaintiff. He has had the plaintiff's medical reports for a long time and could have sought an independent medical examination or sought to cross-examine the doctors on their reports but has not done so. The defendant agreed at a pre-trial conference held on August 13, 2004 that the case was appropriate for summary trial. The only change since that event is that the plaintiff delivered a work evaluation report.
6  There is no conflict in the evidence in the sense that the plaintiff's evidence conflicts with that of the defendant. The defendant has not provided any evidence. The conflict alleged by the defendant is that there is some difference of opinion between the plaintiff's doctors. The court must determine what evidence it accepts and the plaintiff runs the risk that if there is a difference of opinion or difference in degree Mr. Eaton runs the risk that the less favourable evidence may be accepted (Elyk v. John Doe,  (S.C.)).
7  The defendant also submits that the report of the plaintiff's family doctor, Dr. Malo, is inadmissible on the grounds that he has shown himself to be an advocate for the plaintiff. In my opinion the report is not argumentative nor can it be characterized as a submission in the guise of expert evidence. I conclude it is admissible.
NATURE OF THE INJURIES ALLEGED AND COURSE OF RECOVERY
8  Mr. Eaton alleges that he suffered soft tissue injuries to his back, neck and shoulders resulting in chronic pain. He also struck his head on something in his vehicle causing pain and subsequent headaches. He also complains of depression and anxiety about driving.
9  Mr. Eaton went to Dr. Malo, on December 11, 1998 complaining of pain in his neck, back and shoulders as well as headaches and pain in his forehead. Dr. Malo prescribed a muscle relaxant, advised the plaintiff to stay off work and take some physiotherapy treatments.
10  The lump on Mr. Eaton's forehead resolved in about a week but the pain in his neck, back and shoulders persisted. Mr. Eaton began physiotherapy on December 16, 1998 and had 11 treatments over a six-week period ending January 22, 1999.
11  Mr. Eaton returned to his job as a radiator mechanic in late January 1999. The physical activity at work made his symptoms somewhat worse as a result of which he received some further physiotherapy. Mr. Eaton has been able to continue with his regular employment although there have been occasional days or parts of days when he has missed work because of pain due to his injuries.
12  Mr. Eaton deposes that he continues to experience back and neck pain on an almost daily basis. He says he has a diminished capacity to participate in recreational activities and to perform household tasks. He developed depression for which he took antidepressant medication and attended counselling. Mr. Eaton also complains that he suffers "flashbacks" and at times becomes nervous when driving. He also complains that his social interests and sexual drive have diminished.
13  Mr. Eaton's wife has provided an affidavit in which she deposed that "there has been a drastic change in Ken's physical capabilities since his motor vehicle accident". She said that before the accident he regularly worked around the house cutting the grass, gardening, painting, moving wood piles, etc. She said that since the accident he requires assistance with everyday tasks and has to hire outside help to perform heavy tasks.
14  Mrs. Eaton also deposed that since the accident her husband has become much less social and outgoing and has become depressed resulting in his being "grumpy" and causing problems with interpersonal relationships within the family.
15  The manager at the shop where Mr. Eaton works provided an affidavit in which he deposed that there has been a drastic change in Mr. Eaton's physical capabilities at work since the accident and that he now requires assistance with the heavy tasks at work.
MEDICAL EVIDENCE
16  Mr. Eaton sought treatment from Dr. Malo, his family physician. Dr. Malo sent Mr. Eaton to Dr. Bass, a specialist in physical medicine. Dr. Malo also sent Mr. Eaton to a neurologist regarding elevated levels of lead in his body, apparently caused by continual exposure to lead in the course of his employment.
17  The plaintiff also provided a functional capacity evaluation report.
18  The following extracts from the reports provide a synopsis of the experts' findings and opinions:
Dr. Malo - report dated November 25, 2003
He was seen on July 6, 2001 for WCB due to the lead level that he had due to his work.
...
On November 13, 2001 he was seen for follow-up regarding Dr. Shtybel's report regarding the lead toxicity and leading towards depression. The decision was to start him on Celexa, which is an antidepressant. We also recommended some counselling for him.
...
The diagnosis of Dr. Bass was the same as mine, which was mainly soft tissue injury in the cervicothoracic and lower lumbar area, which is taking a long time to settle. Dr. Bass felt that one of the reasons that the patient was taking a long time to settle was one of his depression. However I have to oppose that myself as I would have to say that his depression has done very well and at this point in time I do believe that the patient is no longer depressed and that there is some confusion with his imperfect demeanour. I am wondering, which I will discuss later, if his depression is not due to the chronic pain that he has developed as a result of the motor vehicle accident. Dr. Bass is also in the belief that the physical findings of this patient are a direct result of his motor vehicle accident and I agree with him. ...
In resume, Mr. Ken Eaton is now a 53-year-old man who on December 9, 1998 was involved in a motor vehicle accident. As a result of this motor vehicle accident he has been left with chronic back and neck pain. His current status is one of a great ache in his neck and pain. ... I do believe that this patient will not be able to continue with heavy physical demands of his work until the age of 65. ...
... prior to the motor vehicle accident this gentleman had never seeked (sic) medical advice for depression ...
My prognosis for this gentleman is unfortunately much more guarded than Dr. Bass. I do not believe that after five years we could have any significant improvement of his discomfort and physical limitations.
Dr. Bass - Report dated June 30, 1999
DIAGNOSIS:
Fibroligamentous strain cervical spine.
Fibroligamentous strain lumbar spine.
Fibroligamentous strain thoracic region and evidence of bilateral rotator cuff problems, not related to this accident.
...
OPINION:
This man has made a slow and partial recovery from a mishap that occurred in December 1998. He did incredibly well with Dr. Malo's prescription of therapy at Summit Rehabilitation but unfortunately he has gone downhill a little since treatment was stopped and he is back into fulltime work.
My feeling at this stage is that this is a man who has a fairly high pain threshold, doesn't seem to complain a great deal, and such patients are often as difficult to treat as those who are somewhat hypochondriacal.
In this man's case, I would strongly recommend that he should continue at work, and that some after hours treatment should be arranged for him a couple of times a week. ...
The outlook at the present time is still uncertain because he has deteriorated slightly since returning to work. ...
Dr. Bass - Report dated August 7, 2003
He is back at work, and has been so since I last saw him in 1999, is able to cope, is sleeping well, is a little short tempered, and his weight remains approximately the same but social interests and sexual drive are much diminished. He is quite frustrated.
...
DIAGNOSIS:
I think this man's problem still remains the same as it was previously, namely a soft tissue injury in the cervicothoracic and in the lower lumbar region, which is taking quite a long time to settle. I feel that probably one of the reasons it's taking some time is that he is depressed, and until this is dealt with he is going to have problems as patient's frequently do when reactive depression becomes a problem with soft tissue injury.
OPINION:
I think the man is still suffering from the results of his motor vehicle accident but there is a slight change for the better and I feel at this stage some four and a half years after the accident, that it would be appropriate to seriously consider injection by an anesthetist skilled in injection. ...
...
I believe in the absence of serious injury apart from the calcific tendonitis, I don't believe this man is going to have any serious long term effects and I would have to say that having spoken to him twice now, I get the impression he is a really tough sort of character who does not make a great deal of fuss but simply gets on with what his moderately heavy job requires.
 Dr. Shtybel - Consultation report dated 
  October 18, 2001 
History:
This man has been exposed to lead by working in the radiator business for the last 28 years. Your letter indicates that he has a serum lead level of 2.56. His subjective complaints started approximately a year ago. He complains of fatigue, having no appetite, 20 lbs. of weight loss, anorexia and emotional problems. He tells me his emotional problems are that he is more irritable and short tempered and he has nightmares. He then goes on to elaborate that they are not really nightmares but he has "visions". He says when he is about to fall asleep that he will see himself falling or he sees himself being blown up. He says he is falling from a building.
...
... He has no problems driving. He denies any problems performing his duties at work. ...
...
He denies depression. He does not feel that he has any problems concentrating but he says that he stopped watching TV series because he cannot remember what he watched the next day. His sex drive is diminished. He tells me that over the last year his potency has diminished. He says he is sleeping poorly and he has initial insomnia and will often wake up in the night and turn the TV back on. He says he has lost interest in puttering around in his basement the last two years and says he has become a "couch potato" and just wants to go to bed and watch TV at 8 or 9 o'clock.
...
Neurovascular examination is normal.
...
Muscle bulk, power and tone are normal.
..
PRECIS:
This man presents with a constellation of symptoms developing over the last year or two including anorexia and weight loss, anhedonia, insomnia, decreased sex drive, fatigue and probable hypnagogic sleep hallucinations. I believe that his primary problem is that of a depression. I find no evidence on elemental neurologic examination or systematic cognitive function testing of any neurotoxicity from lead involving the peripheral or central nervous system.
19  In addition to the foregoing medical intervention, Mr. Eaton underwent a functional capacity evaluation. The report, dated August 12, 2004 sets out the results of a large number of tests (28) and provides a rather general opinion concerning Mr. Eaton's functional limitations. It does not expressly correlate the results of the testing to the demands of Mr. Eaton's job. The report concludes that Mr. Eaton demonstrated the ability to function at an overall physical demand level of light (to just below medium) by both CCDO (Canadian Classification and Dictionary of Occupations) and NOC (National Occupation Classification) standards.
CAUSATION AND EXTENT OF INJURIES
20  Counsel for the defendant submitted that Mr. Eaton's high level of lead in his body is the most probable cause of his ongoing physical and emotional or psychological complaints. The medical evidence does not support this submission. Dr. Malo referred Mr. Eaton to Dr. Shtybel because of concern whether lead toxicity was causing symptoms of aggression, poor concentration, poor short term memory and headaches. Dr. Shtybel found no evidence of any neurotoxicity from lead involving the peripheral or central nervous system. He was of the opinion that Mr. Eaton was suffering from depression but there is nothing in his report to suggest that the depression was caused by lead toxicity. It appears to me that the opinion is to the contrary.
21  I am satisfied that the defendant's negligence was the cause of Mr. Eaton's injury, loss and damage. I am satisfied that Mr. Eaton suffered a mild to moderate soft tissue injury to his neck, and back, which has continued to cause some pain and discomfort to date.
22  Dr. Malo's prognosis is guarded. He doubts whether Mr. Eaton will see much improvement. The specialist, Dr. Bass, on the other hand is more optimistic. He is of the opinion that Mr. Eaton should not have any serious long-term effects.
23  In my view, Dr. Bass is not saying that Mr. Eaton will not continue to have symptoms from time to time as a result of the injury. On the basis of the whole of the evidence, I expect that he will. My reading of Dr. Bass's report is that, given the kind of robust man that Mr. Eaton is, he does not expect that the symptoms will hold him back from being able to continue with his present occupation.
24  It appears to me that Dr. Malo and Dr. Bass share the view that Mr. Eaton has suffered some reactive depression as a result of the pain and discomfort. In his report of November 25, 2003 Dr. Malo expresses the opinion that Mr. Eaton is no longer depressed. I accept this evidence.
25  I am also satisfied that Mr. Eaton's loss of interest, socially and sexually, was caused by the accident.
NON-PECUNIARY DAMAGES
26  Mr. Eaton's primary injury was of a soft tissue type to his neck and back from which he still experiences symptoms some six years later. In my view his injuries fall within the mild to moderate category. The injuries have affected Mr. Eaton's ability to enjoy recreational pursuits and social activities, have caused him to become depressed and have interfered with his relationships with his wife and other family members.
27  I accept the evidence that Mr. Eaton was generally a fit person prior to the accident.
28  Counsel for the plaintiff submits that an appropriate award for non-pecuniary damages is in the <damage type = "other">$35,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$45,000</damage> range. He provides a number of cases in support including:
 Baas v. Jellema  (C.A.) <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage> 
 Miscisco v. Small  (S.C.) <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage> 
 Varnes v. Warawa  (S.C.) <damage type = "other">$35,000</damage> 
 Gill v. Moore  (S.C.) <damage type = "other">$35,000</damage> 
 Lane v. Ford Credit Canada Leasing Limited et  
 al., , . <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage> 
29  Counsel for the defendant submits that the plaintiff's injuries had substantially resolved by early 2000 and that any continuing problems are due to the plaintiff's failure to engage in further physiotherapy or to maintain an appropriate exercise program. He submits that an appropriate award for non-pecuniary loss is in the range of <damage type = "other">$8,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">12,000</damage>, citing the following cases:
 Bigger v. Dadswell, <damage type = "other">$ 7,500</damage> 
 Gill v. Chen, <damage type = "other">$10,000</damage> 
 Machala v. Roodenburg, - <damage type = "other">$11,000</damage> 
 Kovacevic v. Leschner, <damage type = "other">$12,000</damage> 
 Dowell v. Knight, . <damage type = "other">$12,000</damage> 
30  With regard to the alleged failure to mitigate, Mr. Eaton attended physiotherapy following the accident as recommended. He received further physiotherapy treatments as recommended when he experienced increased pain brought on by his work activities. It is true that he did not attend for further physiotherapy in August 2000 but he continued to remain active by working. Mr. Eaton also employed regular hot tub therapy to aid in relaxation to lessen his symptoms. I am not satisfied the defendant has proven any failure to mitigate warranting a reduction in the plaintiff's damages.
31  I have reviewed the authorities cited by counsel. I do not intend to summarize the facts of each case in these reasons but note that all of the cases cited by the defendant involve plaintiffs whose injuries were considerably less severe than those that Mr. Eaton suffered. For example, in Machala the plaintiff was fully recovered within about 7 months and in Dowell the plaintiff was fully recovered within a year.
32  The circumstances in this case are much more similar to those in Varnes, where the plaintiff continued to suffer back pain more than 5 years after the accident, and Lane, where the plaintiff still experienced near constant backache with flare-ups 4 years after the accident. In both of those cases the plaintiffs had returned to work within a month of the accident.
33  In my view, an award of damages of <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$37,500</damage> will provide appropriate compensation for Mr. Eaton's non-pecuniary damages for pain, suffering, and interference with his daily activities, including his recreational, family and social pursuits. This figure includes an allowance of <damage type = "other">$2,500</damage> on account of Mr. Eaton's reduced capacity to perform household chores which other family members, particularly his wife, have had to make up for.
PAST WAGE LOSS
34  The parties are agreed that the plaintiff gross past wage loss is <damage type = "other">$4,992</damage>. From that figure must be deducted the income tax he would have paid. I prefer to use the plaintiff's rate for 2000 (23.5%) as submitted by the defendant over the slightly lower rate for 2001 (19.5%) as submitted by the plaintiff. I therefore allow the past wage loss claim in the amount of <damage type = "past wage loss">$3,818.88</damage>.
LOSS OF EARNING CAPACITY
35  Mr. Eaton's soft tissue injuries did not prevent him from returning to his job as a radiator mechanic by the end of January 1999, although they affected his ability to perform his job somewhat in that he now requires assistance from co-workers with the heavy tasks.
36  Dr. Malo is of the opinion that Mr. Eaton has suffered a permanent injury which will likely affect his future employment. The specialist, Dr. Bass, is far less pessimistic about the future. He expects the plaintiff will be able to carry on with his job and work through any residual pain and discomfort because Mr. Eaton has a tough psychological makeup.
37  The functional capacity evaluation paints a rather negative picture of Mr. Eaton's capacity. However, it must be viewed in light of the fact that Mr. Eaton has been able to function at his job since January 1999.
38  Considering the whole of the evidence, it is my view that Mr. Eaton's injuries have resulted in a diminished capacity to perform his job. He now requires more assistance and he has less strength and stamina. In my opinion the plaintiff has established the criteria set out in Brown v. Golaiy :
he has been rendered overall less capable from earning income from all types of employment;
he is less attractive as an employee to potential employers;
his injuries have reduced the scope of potential job opportunities;
he is less valuable to himself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market.
39  While I conclude that Mr. Eaton has suffered some diminishment in his earning capacity, I am not satisfied the quantum of that loss is as great as suggested by his counsel. Mr. Eaton's has maintained his regular employment for over 5 years now albeit with more assistance than he had before he was injured. In quantifying the loss I must attempt to assess the risk of diminished earnings in the future. I am not satisfied that an award in the range of <damage type = "other">$30,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage>, equivalent to the loss of a year's income, as suggested by the plaintiff's counsel, is justified in these circumstances. Recognizing that the exercise is somewhat like gazing into a crystal ball, I conclude that a more modest award of <damage type = "future wage loss">$10,000</damage> under this head is appropriate.
LOSS OF HOUSEKEEPING CAPACITY
40  The plaintiff seeks an award of <damage type = "other">$2,000</damage> per year for each of the past 6 years to compensate for his lack of ability to contribute to work in and around the house, including mowing the grass, gardening, painting, and moving furniture. He also seeks an amount of <damage type = "other">$1,800</damage> which he paid to obtain assistance in putting a new roof on his house.
41  In Kroeker v. Jansen  (B.C.C.A.) the Court of Appeal recognized that "housekeeping and other spousal services have economic value for which a claim by an injured party will lie even where those services are replaced gratuitously from within the family". In Kroeker, Gibbs J.A. recognized the need for caution in making awards for this kind of loss "lest it unleash a flood of excessive claims".
42  In McTavish v. MacGillivray,  (C.A.) the court held that an appropriate method of compensating for loss of housekeeping capacity is on a replacement cost basis, even if the services in question were replaced voluntarily by other family members.
43  Counsel for the plaintiff submits that an amount of <damage type = "other">$2,000</damage> per year for 6 years would be conservative. The difficulty with this submission is that there is a lack of evidence as to how many hours were spent by other family members performing services that would otherwise have been performed by the plaintiff and no evidence as to the market value of those services. The plaintiff deposed that
... there are many household tasks that I am no longer able to perform. For example, my wife now has to cut the grass, because leaning forward to (sic) any period of time cause me pain.
I am no longer able to cut my own firewood. Previous to the accident I could cut two cords per year:
I can no longer perform any task which requires stretching, such as painting, changing lightbulbs, etc.
44  The only specific cost that the plaintiff set is in relation to replacing the roof on his house. He deposed that he "had to pay <damage type = "other">$1,800</damage> in labour to obtain assistance in performing this task" (emphasis added). There is no supporting invoice or evidence describing precisely what assistance was provided by the contractor and what work he did himself. There is insufficient evidence to persuade me that the plaintiff would have done the roofing without this outside assistance if the accident had not occurred.
45  The plaintiff's wife similarly provides only the most general evidence, saying:
... Ken requires assistance with everyday tasks and is forced to hire outside help to assist with home maintenance and to perform any heavy tasks that may be required.
Due to Ken's injuries, I now perform many more household tasks than I did prior to the Plaintiff's motor vehicle accident, including mowing the lawn regularly, all gardening and outside maintenance, power-raking the grass, moving wood piles, painting, moving furniture and so on.
46  As I read Kroeker v. Jansen and McTavish v. MacGillivray it is open to a trial judge to compensate for this loss as a factor in the assessment of the non-pecuniary loss. Given the lack of evidence with regard to replacement cost, that is the most appropriate way to compensate the plaintiff in this case and the one I have chosen.
COST OF FUTURE CARE
47  Counsel for the plaintiff submits Mr. Eaton is entitled to an award for the future cost of physiotherapy and/or chiropractic treatments and/or massage therapy and/or an exercise facility. He also submits that Mr. Eaton should receive compensation for loss of future housekeeping capacity. He submits that a global award of <damage type = "other">$5,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$10,000</damage> would be appropriate.
48  Mr. Eaton's medical advisors have recommended that he maintain his fitness. The specialist, Dr. Bass, suggests Mr. Eaton consider injection by an anaesthetist and the involvement of an expert in pain management. No costs are provided for this treatment and there is no indication the plaintiff intends to pursue it. Dr. Bass does not appear to recommend physiotherapy, massage or chiropractic treatment.
49  In my opinion the plaintiff has failed to establish this head of damages.
SPECIAL DAMAGES
50  The largest claim under this head (apart from the cost of roof repairs, which I have disallowed) is the <damage type = "sub-special">$2,400</damage> cost of a special bed. I accept that as an allowable item of special damage. I also accept the user fees and mileage as set out in the plaintiff's affidavit, totalling <damage type = "sub-special">$183.60</damage>.
SUMMARY
51  I assess the plaintiff's damages in the total amount of <damage type = "total">$53,902.48</damage>, under the following heads:
 Non-pecuniary damages <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$37,500.00</damage> 
 Past wage loss <damage type = "past wage loss">$ 3,818.88</damage> 
 Loss of income earning capacity <damage type = "future wage loss">$10,000.00</damage> 
 Special damages <damage type = "special">$ 2,583.60</damage> 
<damage type = "total">$53,902.48</damage> 
========= 
52  Unless there are any circumstances of which I am not aware, the plaintiff will be entitled to his costs at scale 3.
JOYCE J.
End of Document
Hawkenson v. Rogers, [2005] B.C.J. No. 456
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
E.R.A. Edwards J.
Heard: December 6 - 10 and 13 - 17, 2004.
Judgment: March 7, 2005.
Vancouver Registry No. C983739
[2005] B.C.J. No. 456   |   2005 BCSC 318   |   137 A.C.W.S. (3d) 1070
Between Bruce Hawkenson, Ann Jeanette Hawkenson and Hawk Forest Holdings Ltd., plaintiffs, and William Rogers, also known as Bill Rogers, and Midland Walwyn Capital Inc., defendants
(105 paras.)
Case Summary
Securities regulation — Dealers — Duties — Supervision of sales representatives — Professional responsibility — Professional duties — Fiduciary duties — Professions — Other — Investment and management consultants — Stock brokers — Tort law — Negligence — Fiduciary duty — Commercial law — Specialized relationships — Stock brokers — Damages — Assessment — Measure of damages — Time for assessment.
Action by the plaintiffs, the Hawkensons and their company, against the defendant, Rogers, the financial advisor to the plaintiffs, and his investment firm Midland Walwyn, for damages for losses in investment accounts caused by breach of contract, negligence, and breach of fiduciary duty. The plaintiffs lost <damage type = "other">$500,000</damage> of the <damage type = "other">$900,000</damage> they contributed to their investment accounts. Approximately <damage type = "other">$300,000</damage> was lost in two securities traded in the plaintiffs' company's margin account. A further $100,000 was lost in a private placement trade. Hawkenson described himself in the new application form as a sophisticated investor. However, he could recall no discussion with Rogers about his investment knowledge, his experience, the prospect of losses, or what he was prepared to lose in any of the accounts. It was unclear whether the new application form for the plaintiffs' company indicated a 10 per cent or 40 per cent speculative investment component for its portfolio. The plaintiffs submitted that Rogers failed to review the company's account to ensure that it conformed to its investment objectives. The majority of losses occurred on the company account which at one point had a portfolio comprised of 62 per cent speculative investments. 

HELD: Action allowed in part.
 The defendants were not liable for the performance of the Hawkensons' personal accounts because of the agreed-upon speculative nature of the accounts and Hawkenson's investment experience. Rogers and Midland failed to meet industry standards in their handling of the company account and were therefore negligent. Midland and Rogers had a professional responsibility to review the company account and advise Hawkenson to curtail losses in his company's account by reducing the risk associated with margin trading and over-concentration in speculative stocks. The defendants were not liable for losses on the company's account prior to 1996 because the portfolio as a whole performed just below the rate of return of the market index. The defendants were not liable for the loss on the private placement because they acted in accordance with Hawkenson's express instructions. Losses after 1996 were assessed through reliance on expert evidence that compared the actual performance of the company account against a hypothetical competently managed account rebalanced in accordance with Hawkenson's stated investment objectives for the company. On this basis, damages were assessed at <damage type = "total">$65,500</damage>.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Negligence Act, .
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiffs: H. Wiebach and S. Vorbrodt
Counsel for the Defendant W. Rogers: G.E.H. Cadman, Q.C. H. Craig
Counsel for the Defendant Midland Walwyn Capital Inc.: G. Johnson
E.R.A. EDWARDS J.
1   The plaintiffs claim damages for losses in investment accounts, alleging breach of contract, negligence and breach of fiduciary duty.
2  At the outset of the trial the style of cause was amended to reflect a change of name of the corporate plaintiff to Hawk Forest Holdings Ltd. Because of references to the original name, Folklore Enterprises Ltd., in records and transcripts, I will refer to the corporate plaintiff in these reasons as "Folklore".
3  Although Merrill Lynch succeeded the corporate defendant Midland Walwyn Capital Inc. ("Midland"), counsel advised there was no need to amend the style of cause to reflect that change.
4  The individual plaintiffs are husband and wife who were the shareholders of Folklore at the relevant time, 1992 through 1997. All three had investment accounts at Midland during that period, when, for the most part, the defendant William Rogers ("Rogers") was their financial advisor or registered representative.
5  A claim that Rogers earned secret profits from his dealings in the plaintiffs' accounts was formally abandoned by their counsel at the outset of the trial.
6  Plaintiffs' counsel candidly acknowledged he was not confident the alleged breach of fiduciary duty would be made out on the evidence. I find it has not been proved. Plaintiffs' counsel took the position that the measure of damages would be the same whether liability were established on the basis of negligence, breach of contract or breach of fiduciary duty.
7  Virtually all dealings in all the plaintiffs' accounts were between Bruce Hawkenson ("Hawkenson") and Rogers.
8  Most of the losses, about <damage type = "other">$500,000</damage> of the total of <damage type = "other">$900,000</damage> contributed by the plaintiffs to the accounts, were incurred in Folklore's Canadian margin account ("the Folklore account"). About <damage type = "other">$300,000</damage> was lost in only two securities, Chase and Software Control. A further $100,000 or so was lost in an "off-book" private placement of GWR Resources ("GWR") shares.
9  Substantial losses in the Folklore account occurred in the period May 1996 to November 1997, when it was closed.
10  Hawkenson opened a personal Canadian Margin account with Midland by signing a New Account Application Form ("NAAF") on August 5, 1992. The NAAF disclosed Hawkenson's income was over <damage type = "other">$150,000</damage>, his net worth was over <damage type = "other">$500,000</damage> (these are the top categories in each case on the form) and that he had between $300,000 and $400,000 capital to invest. Hawkenson acknowledged at trial all this information was substantially correct.
11  The NAAF indicated Hawkenson's investment knowledge was "excellent" (the top category), that he had investment experience with stocks, bonds, mutual funds and "others" and his investment objectives were 100% "Speculative". This was reflected in the initial order of "3000 TTR" shares in a company promoting new technology for processing manure.
12  Hawkenson could recall no discussion with Rogers about his investment knowledge or experience or the prospect of losses or what he was prepared to lose in any of the accounts. Hawkenson and Rogers were acquainted through their church for years before the accounts were opened, so Rogers had some idea of Hawkenson's business background.
13  On February 18, 1994, Hawkenson signed a NAAF for an RRSP account. Its details were consistent with those disclosed in his margin account NAAF, except his income is indicated between $50,000 and $100,000, his past experience includes an account in the $200,000 to $300,000 range, his capital for investment between is <damage type = "other">$200,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$300,000</damage> and his investment objectives 30% "Long Term Growth", 40% "Short Term Trading" and 30% "Speculative".
14  The Folklore account was opened with a NAAF dated August 17, 1992. On the face of the NAAF, Hawkenson's signature was witnessed by Rogers a year later on August 20, 1993, after the account was approved by John Ryan, Midland's branch manager, on January 24, 1993. No one could explain this sequence of dates. Hawkenson testified he signed the NAAF on August 17, 1992, after it was typed by Rogers' assistant. Trading began in the account in August 1992.
15  Hawkenson testified he had little "luck" with securities investments prior to 1992 and was induced to open the accounts by Rogers' statement that "we're making money for our clients". Rogers could not specifically recall making such a statement to Hawkenson. If Rogers did tout himself and Midland as capable of making money for clients, it was mere puff which did not alter the legal relationship of the parties.
16  The Folklore NAAF is ambiguous regarding the client's "Investment Objectives". The original copy of the NAAF discloses under that heading, typewritten percentages of 40% "Income", 40% "Long Term Growth", 10% "Short Term Trading" and 10% "Speculative" for these four categories of investment.
17  Those percentage numbers have been overwritten by hand, so the typewritten numbers are unclear. Beside them on the NAAF are handwritten the percentages 10%, 40%, 10% and 40%, respectively, applicable to the same four categories.
18  Rogers testified the handwriting was his and he "believed" it had been made in consultation with Hawkenson when he came in to sign the NAAF. No one initialled the hand written numbers. Hawkenson testified he signed the NAAF the same day it was typed. Although he had the client copy in his records, which included the handwritten percentages, he did not notice them until this litigation began after the Folklore account was closed.
19  Neither Rogers nor Hawkenson paid any attention to either the typed or hand printed version of the "Investment Objectives" disclosed on the NAAF during the five years the Folklore account was active.
20  Neither Rogers nor Hawkenson, according to their testimony, was able to determine what securities were appropriate for the key "Speculative" category, or to distinguish the degree of risk associated with each of the four categories of securities mentioned in the NAAF.
21  Rogers, on cross-examination, indicated he relied on a kind of mantra, that "all investments involve risk" when advising clients about risk. He asserted (in the context of hypothetical questions about Government of Canada bonds) that bonds were historically the riskiest of investment instruments. I find it impossible to believe that Rogers, with years of experience as a registered representative, was unaware that penny mining stocks were inherently riskier than government bonds or shares in banks or other established enterprises.
22  Likewise, I find it impossible to believe that Hawkenson could accept, as uncritically as he testified he did, investment advice from Rogers. According to both Hawkenson and Rogers, Rogers expressed simplistic and unconventional views of the degree of risk associated with various types of investments during their regular and frequent meetings to discuss investments.
23  Hawkenson had experience with various types of investments in his portfolios and must have observed that resource stocks, for example, were more volatile than mutual funds. Indeed, Hawkenson had a good deal of experience with volatile mining stocks and took it upon himself to personally visit properties of companies he invested in and to contact those promoting them, presumably to satisfy himself of these stocks' prospects.
24  Hawkenson also acted as the directing mind of a junior mining company Panther Mines Ltd. In December 1997 he signed a quarterly report on its behalf which included the following: "The Bre-x scandal, a <damage type = "other">$100</damage> drop in the price of gold and the Dow Jones index dropping 550 points in one day have contributed to the metals market and Junior companies being under a great deal of strain". Although Hawkenson testified he did not write this notice, I assume he understood his duty of accurate disclosure and believed what he signed. This disclosure statement and the care with which he researched other mining stocks indicates that Hawkenson had a relatively sophisticated understanding of the risks associated with the speculative stocks which sustained most of the losses in the Folklore account.
25  Two experts, Colin Clark and Karen Henderson, whose expertise was acknowledged by all parties, both testified the Folklore account contained shares which they could readily identify as fitting the "Speculative" category in the NAAF, meaning they were highly volatile with a concomitant degree of risk.
26  I find both Rogers and Hawkenson must have been aware the Folklore account was heavily concentrated in such stocks before, after and at the time the total value of the Folklore account reached its peak in May 1996. That peak was largely the result of appreciation in the value of shares in the "Speculative" category.
27  Hawkenson never challenged the 10%, 40%, 10%, 40% allocation of "Investment Objectives" handwritten on the NAAF during the years the Folklore account was active. Folklore received the benefit of significant appreciation of shares in the "Speculative" category to May 1996. I find Folklore cannot now repudiate that allocation. I find the Folklore account "Investment Objectives" were those handwritten on the NAAF.
28  It is the plaintiffs' position that regardless of whether the Folklore NAAF provided for a 10% or $40% "Speculative" component of the portfolio, it would be impossible for the Folklore account to sustain the losses it did if Rogers had not wholly failed to review the Folklore account periodically to ensure it conformed to the "Investment Objectives" reflected by the NAAF.
29  In short, the plaintiffs argue Rogers ignored the "Investment Objectives" disclosed in the NAAF in recommending investments and failed to diversify the Folklore account, putting too much emphasis on speculative securities he favoured and repeatedly recommended, resulting in excessive concentration in a few such stocks, particularly Chase, Software Control and GWR.
30  In April 1994, <damage type = "other">$120,000</damage> was withdrawn from the Folklore account to purchase a private placement of shares in GRW. Ultimately, over half of this investment was lost.
31  In October 1995 Hawkenson transferred <damage type = "other">$263,500</damage> from a Guaranteed Income Certificate to the Folklore account, which before the transfer had a total value of about <damage type = "other">$340,000</damage>, some <damage type = "other">$135,000</damage> below the total client contributions to it, the lowest it had been since its inception. Paper losses of that magnitude show Hawkenson had a considerable risk tolerance, at least until October 1995.
32  According to Hawkenson, he emphasized to Rogers at a face to face meeting that he was retiring and could not afford to lose "a penny" of the <damage type = "other">$263,500.</damage> They did not, however, review the Folklore account or discuss alternative investment objectives at the meeting.
33  Rogers did not recall Hawkenson telling him he could not afford to lose any of the <damage type = "other">$263,500</damage>.
34  After October 1995 the Folklore account rose impressively, reaching a high of $147,100 over the total client contributions in May 1996. Thereafter it fell more or less continuously month after month, but for occasional short rallies, until it reached a low of <damage type = "other">$429,145</damage> below client contributions in July 1997. The equivalent number was <damage type = "other">$426,840</damage> in November 1997 when the Folklore account was closed and transferred to another brokerage.
35  In August or September 1997 Rogers left Midland and met with Hawkenson to persuade him to move his accounts to Nesbitt Burns where Rogers had set up shop. According to Hawkenson, he told Rogers that was out of the question, in light of the Folklore account losses.
36  Hawkenson testified that Rogers professed to be unaware the losses were nearly <damage type = "other">$500,000</damage> and apologized when informed of the amount, promising to "make it back" if Hawkenson transferred his accounts from Midland.
37  Rogers testified he recalled the meeting including discussion of transferring the accounts, but otherwise nothing specific about what was discussed.
38  In September 1997, John Ryan, who succeeded Rogers as Hawkenson's registered representative at Midland, sent Hawkenson summaries of his accounts including the Folklore account. These showed the losses that had been sustained in the Folklore account were then over 67%.
39  According to Hawkenson, these summaries were accompanied by a letter from Ryan which said that Midland wished to retain the accounts and that while Hawkenson might think Rogers was his friend, no friend would ever let an account get into this shape.
40  Hawkenson testified the letter was not in evidence because his wife was so upset when she saw it that she ripped it up.
41  Jeannette Hawkenson testified that she "chose not to know" what was occurring in the Folklore account prior to 1997. So when she read the letter she was "hurt and dismayed" and ripped it up so that her husband would not read it again, because "it wasn't something to keep in front of someone who had seen it".
42  Ryan testified he could not recall sending such a letter but agreed it was "possible" he had done so, from which I infer he did not disagree that no "friend" would have allowed the Folklore account to fall as long and far as it did. If no "friend" would have allowed this to happen certainly no paid financial advisor ought to have allowed it either. I find Midland and Rogers had a professional responsibility to advise Hawkenson to curtail loses by reducing the risk associated with margin trading and over-concentration in speculative stocks.
43  The issue I have to decide is whether Rogers and Midland met industry standards of competence in their handling of the Folklore account after May 1996.
44  I will briefly deal with the plaintiffs' claims relating to their other Midland accounts.
45  Jeannette Hawkenson opened Canadian Margin and RRSP accounts with Midland on August 7, 1992 and January 26, 1994, respectively. She testified that she did not recall Rogers interviewing her to fill out the required NAAFs, which is reflected by the fact that many details in them are wrong.
46  For example, she is an American not a Canadian citizen, her investment experience was nil, not "excellent" and she had no past investment experience with stocks or bonds notwithstanding what the NAAFs indicate. Nevertheless, she acknowledged signing the NAAF's, obviously paying no heed to the accuracy of their content.
47  This is consistent with her testimony that she had virtually nothing to do with the accounts. She approved of her husband dealing on her behalf with Rogers, even though the NAAFs indicate she gave him no authority to do so. She chose not to review the monthly statements she received. Her accounts sustained no losses, in the sense there were none at the time the accounts were closed.
48  Even if there had been losses in her accounts, I find Jeannette Hawkenson relied wholly on her husband as agent to deal with Rogers and Midland in respect of these accounts and has no claim against the defendants. She placed her entire reliance on her husband and none on the defendants for the investments of these accounts, as reflected by her failure to even read her own monthly statements to determine what her investments were and how they were performing.
49  Likewise, I find the defendants are not liable for the performance of the Hawkenson personal margin account, for which the NAAF indicates the investment objectives were 100% "Speculative", or for that of his RRSP account. There was little or no testimony specific to the operation of these accounts.
50  I find it is unnecessary to consider the period of time before May 1996, when the Folklore account was at its maximum, for the following reasons. Even if the defendants negligently handled the Folklore account prior to May 1996, the plaintiffs cannot prove resulting damages during that period because the Folklore account was within a range of reasonable profitability for one with its investment objectives. Comparison data shows that when the Folklore account was at its peak in May 1996 it was about 10% below what it would have been if the same periodic contributions had been invested in a TSE 300 index fund to that date.
51  Karen Henderson [" Ms. Henderson"] testified, in response to questions from the court, that whichever investment objective profile (10% or 40% "Speculative") is applied to the Folklore account, any portfolio reflecting either profile would be more volatile than the TSX (formerly TSE 300) index at the time. Ms. Henderson testified the Folklore account's performance to May 1996 would not be "surprising" compared to the TSX, given the more speculative profile of the Folklore account.
52  From that I infer that had the plaintiffs sued in May 1996 alleging losses in the Folklore account due to the defendants' negligence, damages could not have be proved because the account at that date was within the range of performance which could have been expected had it been competently managed in accordance with the investment profile in the Folklore NAAF. In other words, it could not be proved that any alleged negligence caused loss or damages as of that date.
53  Ms. Henderson, who was formerly employed by Midland, testified that in 1996, more than <damage type = "other">$1000</damage> in commissions in any month in an account would automatically trigger a review by Midland's branch manager of the account. In May 1996 over <damage type = "other">$3000</damage> in commissions were charged in the Folklore account.
54  There is no evidence that a review of the Folklore account was undertaken by Ryan, the then Midland branch manager, in light of the level of commissions in May 1996.
55  Ryan testified that he had delegated monthly account review responsibility to an assistant manager, Don Grantham ["Grantham"], by April 1996. Grantham did not testify. Ryan testified he could not recall if Grantham ever mentioned the Folklore account to him. Ryan did recall Grantham "saying there was concentration in Chase generally" and that "we mentioned it to Rogers".
56  Ryan accepted Rogers' testimony that he and Ryan had never discussed the Folklore account.
57  Ryan acknowledged that the Folklore account did not come to his attention in May 1996 or thereafter until Rogers left Midland in September 1997.
58  During that period, the "Total Value" of the Folklore account dropped from <damage type = "other">$815,945</damage> to <damage type = "other">$246,615</damage> with no withdrawals, while the "Speculative" component of the portfolio never went below 40%, ranging from 62% to 42% month by month, while it remained highly concentrated in a few speculative stocks and carried at least <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage> on margin.
59  Ryan admitted this performance reflected the fact that the supervision of the Folklore account by Midland had been "terrible". Midland's counsel accepted that there ought to have been a supervisory review of the Folklore account by Midland management in May 1996.
60  John Vivach, an expert called by Midland, agreed that the circumstances in the Folklore account at the relevant time ought to have at least led to the branch manager interviewing the registered representative (Rogers) to seek an explanation. On the evidence, this never happened. Ryan never discussed the Folklore account with Rogers.
61  I find that Midland failed to properly supervise the Folklore account during the period May 1996 to September 1997. This is particularly significant in light of Rogers' apparent inability (if his testimony were accepted) to appreciate the degree of risk associated with highly concentrating an account with substantial margin in a few volatile and therefore risky share positions, or Rogers' inability (and this I do accept) to assist clients on the risk issue other than with the unhelpful advice "all investments are risky". I find Rogers and Midland failed to meet industry standards in their handling of the Folklore account and were therefore negligent.
62  The ultimate issue is whether the defendants' negligence caused or contributed to causing the losses sustained in the Folklore account after May 1996.
63  The assessment of possible damages in this case presents three problems. First, what is the proper measure of damages? Second, did Hawkenson contribute to the damages by failing to take timely action to contain mounting losses after May 1996? Third, are losses in the GWR shares held outside the Folklore account attributable to the defendants?
64  I find that the proper approach to assessing possible damages is to assume that a supervisory review of the Folklore account took place in May 1996, as it ought to have, and to compare what its performance would have been had competent advice been given to, and accepted by, Hawkenson after such a review, with the actual performance of the Folklore account thereafter to September 1997, when Hawkenson received Ryan's report.
65  While the actual performance of the Folklore account is documented, the other side of the comparison, what might have been if the Folklore account had been reviewed in May 1996 and thereafter properly supervised and prudently invested consistent with the investment objectives profile in the Folklore NAAF, involves a degree of speculation about what advice a competent financial advisor would have given respecting the Folklore account and whether Hawkenson would have accepted that advice. In short, this involves consideration of hypothetical circumstances.
66  The Court of Appeal in Knudsen v. Smith , recently clarified the application of the principle in Athey v. Leonati,  that where damages are to be assessed on hypothetical events, these need not be proved on a balance of probabilities "but are simply to be given weight according to their respective likelihood". This approach has been applied in respect of financial losses for professional negligence in Webster v. Ernst & Young (No. 1)  and (No. 2)  (B.C.C.A.).
67  In Webster (No. 1) at paragraphs 20 and 22 Newbury J.A. concluded it was necessary for the trial judge to "estimate the possibilities" "arising on the evidence" even where the expert and other evidence was "highly unsatisfactory" or no doubt "deficient". Newbury J.A. held at paragraph 22 that "[o]nce their loss was shown, the plaintiffs were entitled, despite the difficulty, to have a court assess [the hypothetical possibilities]".
68  In this case it cannot be determined if the plaintiffs suffered loss in the Folklore account after May 1996 as a result of the negligence of the defendants unless the actual performance of the account is compared to its hypothetical performance.
69  This analysis is fraught with difficulty. The court must attempt to assess the probabilities of hypothetical events while avoiding speculation. Nevertheless it is the approach I am obliged to follow. In this case it involves an assessment, based on the evidence of the past performance of the Folklore account and the parties' conduct, of what they likely would have done following a supervisory review in May 1996 and how the Folklore account would have thereafter performed in light their hypothetical actions.
70  My approach is to examine the pre and post May 1996 Folklore account activity in light of the whole of the evidence.
71  Both the plaintiffs and defendants relied on expert reports which established that results in the Folklore account would have been much better than those actually realized by September 1997 if the account had been invested with less exposure to margin and less concentration in speculative shares.
72  Both reports are consistent with the conclusion there was loss due to negligence. However, I find certain of the assumptions or hypotheses on which each report is based are not sufficiently consistent with the other evidence at the trial to be accepted as sound bases for assessing damages.
73  The plaintiff's relied on Mr. Clark's expert report which assumes that had the Folklore account "Investment Objectives" of 40%, 40%, 10%, 10%, as typewritten on the NAAF in August 1992, been adhered to until all five of the plaintiffs' accounts were closed in 1997, there would have been an annual return of 7.85% per year, which if applied to all the periodic contributions (assuming $120,000 was not withdrawn in April 1994 for the GRW shares acquired outside the account) would have resulted in a total closing value of the all the accounts some <damage type = "other">$841,782</damage> higher than it actually was in September 1997. If the actual monthly returns on the three mutual funds selected to reflect the 40%, 40%, 10%, 10% profile are used rather than the annual returns, the result is <damage type = "other">$817, 908</damage> rather than <damage type = "other">$841,782</damage>.
74  I have already concluded there is no basis for a finding of liability against the defendants for Jeanette Hawkenson's accounts or Hawkenson's personal margin and RRSP accounts. I can see no basis for assuming they would have been more fruitfully invested than they in fact were. In any event, each of these accounts sustained so little, if any, of the losses they can be ignored.
75  I do not reject Mr. Clark's approach to the assessment of damages because it treats all five accounts as one. Rather, I reject its approach to damages for, amongst others, three principle reasons. First, because I have found that the 10%, 40%, 10%, 40% profile was effectively accepted, since Folklore benefited from it up to May 1996 and Hawkenson never repudiated it. Based on his demonstrated risk tolerance, I am not persuaded that after a hypothetical May 1996 portfolio review Hawkenson would have been persuaded to reduce the speculative portion of the account to 10%. That is particularly so since he had enjoyed a large run up in the value of the speculative component in the preceding months. Second, because I have found there were no damages before May 1996. Third, because I am not persuaded the "off-book" GRW investment is properly included in the assessment of damages.
76  No plausible theory was advanced as to how the defendants could have any liability for that off-book investment. It was Hawkenson's decision to withdraw the money from the Folklore account for that or any other use. The performance of any investment Hawkenson made outside any Midland account with money withdrawn from it, cannot affect the defendants' liability. Had he lost all he withdrew, say, gambling, he would have no claim against the defendants even if they urged him to try his luck. If, say, he had made a killing on real estate speculation with the money, based on a tip from Rogers, that would not go to the defendants' credit on any assessment of damages due to losses in the Midland accounts.
77  Ms. Henderson's expert report estimated at $303,777 the difference between the closing total value of the Folklore account and what it would have been if an effort had been made to rebalance it after October 1995 to ensure it complied with the 10%, 40%, 10%, 40% profile.
78  Ms. Henderson selected October 1995 as the starting point because that was when Hawkenson transferred <damage type = "other">$263,000</damage> from a GIC to the Folklore account with, as Hawkenson testified, the caution to Rogers that he could not afford to lose any of the new investment, because he was retiring.
79  Both Mr. Clark and Ms. Henderson agreed it was prudent to use part of the <damage type = "other">$263,500</damage> in mid-November 1995 to pay off outstanding margin. Ms. Henderson's calculation assumed the balance of the <damage type = "other">$263,500</damage>, some <damage type = "other">$122,000</damage>, would have been used to purchase a bond in November 1995. In fact, no bond was purchased until January 1996 when a <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage> bond was purchased. Ms. Henderson's calculation also assumed approximately <damage type = "other">$90,000</damage> from Echo Bay shares sold in January 1996 was used to purchase a bond.
80  These assumed bond transactions aimed at rebalancing the Folklore account were the only major ones Ms. Henderson assumed occurred during the period October to May 1996, before the Folklore account peaked in May 1996. Had they been made, as and when she hypothesized, the appreciation in value of the Folklore account from $533,000 in October 1995 to its peak of $816,000 in May 1996, which was almost wholly attributable to increases in speculative shares, would not have been as large.
81  That means the Ms. Henderson's report must understate the post May 1996 consequences of rebalancing the account from October 1995, because calculations from May 1996 forward must be based on a lower value of the account as of that date than actually occurred.
82  I have found that possible damages should be assessed from May 1996, not from October 1995 as Ms. Henderson's reports does, because the results in the account in May 1996 are consistent with what might reasonably have been expected of an account with the Folklore "Investment Objectives" profile of 10%, 40%, 10%, 40%.
83  What I must determine, using the Athey v. Leonati approach, is what likely would have happened after May 1996, assuming there had been a proper supervisory review of the Folklore account by Midland management after May 1996, triggered by the high commissions in that month.
84  I find it reasonable to assume that such a review would have had no effect until the June 1996 results were apparent. The Folklore account which had advanced significantly for several months had a dramatic $152,000 reversal between May and June 1996.
85  I further find it reasonable to assume that reversal would have prompted Midland to recommend reducing the speculative component of the portfolio, which was then about 58%, to 40%, and to end margin trading, both of which would reduce risk.
86  I find it unreasonable to assume any more rigorous changes to the Folklore account. More reduction of the speculative component would have meant both Rogers and Hawkenson would have had to repudiate the investment approach which, for several months prior to May 1996, had produced good results. I find it is unlikely Rogers or Midland would have advised a reduction of the speculative component below 40%. Also, for the reasons mentioned in paragraph 70, I find it unreasonable to assume Hawkenson would have agreed to an investment strategy more conservative than eliminating margin and reducing the speculative component to 40%, even if Midland had advised a more conservative strategy.
87  The June 1996 Folklore statement shows a closing cash balance of about <damage type = "other">$162,085</damage> reflecting the negative margin balance. This was then about 24.4% of the total <damage type = "other">$663,871</damage> net value of the account.
88  Since the bulk of the subsequent losses were in the Chase and Software Control shares the "best case scenario" is that Midland, by acumen or accident, would have foreseen these shares were the most risky and advised Hawkenson to sell some of them to eliminate the <damage type = "other">$162,000</damage> margin. Grantham had warned Ryan there was an over concentration in Chase. As of June 1996 the Folklore account held <damage type = "other">$196,650</damage> of Chase shares and <damage type = "other">$130,000</damage> of Software Control shares.
89  I find it safe to assume that a portion of each holding, sufficient to pay off the <damage type = "other">$162,085</damage> margin could be sold during July 1996, realizing the end of July prices of $4.10 for Chase and <damage type = "other">$1.00</damage> for Software Control. This assumption is based on the following facts. First, 10,000 shares of Software Control were sold from the Folklore account on one day in January 1997 at a price of $0.35. From this I infer Rogers or Midland advised and Hawkenson accepted that 10,000 shares could be sold into the market prudently on one day without depressing the price unduly. If that was so when Software Control shares and market capitalization were roughly one third of what they were in July 1996, I find it fair to assume that the sale of 50,000 shares at <damage type = "other">$1.00</damage> in five daily increments of 10,000 shares could have been achieved in July 1996.
90  Likewise I think it fair to assume that sales of five daily increments of 5000 shares of Chase during July 1996 could have been achieved at the July 1996 month end price of <damage type = "other">$4.10</damage>. I base this on the fact that 5000 shares of Chase were purchased in the Folklore account in two 2500 share increments over four days in December 1996, with only a <damage type = "other">$0.04</damage> price increase. From this I infer 5000 share daily increments could have been sold with minimum impact on price during July 1996 when the shares were in the <damage type = "other">$4.00</damage> range.
91  I recognize there may have been other factors influencing the trading of these shares in July 1996. I have no evidence of the daily volumes traded, for example. While that information is no doubt available, it is not before me. In my view a timely result for the parties is preferable to reopening the case to secure such further evidence, which may be of little significance. I note that the assessment of damages under Athey is not a matter of precise calculation.
92  Sale of these shares, say 65,000 Software Control at <damage type = "other">$1.00</damage> and 24,000 shares of Chase at <damage type = "other">$4.10</damage> would have raised <damage type = "other">$163,400</damage> to pay off the margin and reduce the speculative shareholding in the account by the same amount or about 26.4% of its net value of <damage type = "other">$619,378</damage> at the end of July 1996. This would bring the speculative component to about 45.7%, still above the 40% objective in the Folklore NAAF.
93  In order to achieve that 40% objective it would be necessary to reduce the speculative component by roughly a further <damage type = "other">$30,000</damage> with no further reduction in the "Income" or "Growth" components. To do so, I assume the Noranda Forest shares would not have been sold in August 1996 to be replaced with the Echo Bay shares and the 10,000 shares of Belmont Resources sold in August 1996 for <damage type = "other">$1.30</damage> and 10,000 shares of Belmont Resources sold in September for $1.60 would have been reinvested in securities in the "Growth" or "Income" components. Neither the <damage type = "other">$13,000</damage> proceeds from the August 1996 sale of Belmont Resources shares nor new margin would have been used to acquire Anvil Range shares in August.
94  The result of these transactions would have been that by the end of September 1996 the Folklore portfolio would have been reconfigured roughly in accordance with the Folklore NAAF investment objective of 40% speculative shares and been free of margin.
95  On this basis, the Folklore portfolio, as of September 1996 would have consisted of the following "Growth" and "Income" investments, Cash (from Belmont sales) <damage type = "other">$29,000</damage>, Anvil Bond <damage type = "other">$107,000</damage>, Mutual Funds <damage type = "other">$148,232</damage>, Noranda Forest (August 1996 value) <damage type = "other">$72,244</damage>, Crestbrook <damage type = "other">$25,000</damage>, for a total of <damage type = "other">$381,476</damage> and the following "Speculative" investments, 10,000 Belmont @ <damage type = "other">$1.31</damage> = <damage type = "other">$13,100</damage>, 21,800 Chase @ <damage type = "other">$2,85</damage> = <damage type = "other">$62,130</damage>, 35,000 Software Control @ <damage type = "other">$0.85</damage> = <damage type = "other">$29,750</damage>, all other shares (save Anvil Range and Echo Bay) as they stood in the September 1996 Folklore monthly statement = <damage type = "other">$117,484</damage>, for a total of <damage type = "other">$222,464</damage> or 36.8% of the portfolio total of $603,904.
96  Despite the post July 1996 history of the Folklore portfolio, I assume after the May supervisory review and "rebalancing" just outlined, speculative shares would have never again exceeded 40% of the portfolio. I also assume there would have been no further margin trading. I realize these assumptions are inconsistent with the pre and post May 1996 trading in the Folklore account, but they are consistent with the primary assumption that Hawkenson would have got and accepted advice to adopt a somewhat more cautious investment strategy after the big loss between May and June 1996 and would not have been advised or inclined to stray from that course thereafter.
97  In effect, I find it reasonable to assume that having eliminated the margin risk and reduced the speculative component, Rogers and Midland would have met their obligation with respect to cautionary advice and that Hawkenson, who testified he was guided by such advice as he got from Rogers, would have been thereafter content to let the Folklore account remain at around 40% in speculative shares, reflecting his demonstrated risk tolerance, and to refrain from further margin trading.
98  My last two assumptions are that the 40% in the "Speculative" component of the Folklore account, would have performed as it actually did between September 1996 and September 1997 and that the other 60% of the account would have performed as the "Growth" and "Income" components did over that period.
99  These assumptions I base on the likelihood that Rogers and Hawkenson would have continued in their enthusiasm for volatile resource shares in the "speculative" component, with similar results, and that none of the "growth" or "income" investments actually held during the period in question were demonstrated to be inappropriate for those categories.
100  From September 1996 to September 1997 the "Speculative" component declined from $401,000 to $150,000 losing 62.6% and the combined "Growth" and "Income" components declined from <damage type = "other">$340,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$204,000</damage> losing 40%. That is, the rate of loss in the "Speculative" component was 62.6% per year and the rate of loss in the balance of the portfolio was 40% per year.
101  If the components of the hypothetical "rebalanced" margin-free Folklore account had performed as the actual account performed from September 1996 to September 1997, the combined "Income" and "Growth" components would have fallen 40% from <damage type = "other">$381,500</damage> to <damage type = "other">$228,900</damage> and the "Speculative" component would have fallen 62.6% from <damage type = "other">$222,400</damage> to <damage type = "other">$83,200</damage> Leaving a total net value in the portfolio of $321,100.
102  The loss attributable to the defendants' failure to advise the plaintiffs to reduce risk by eliminating margin and reducing the speculative component to around 40% and maintaining it there was the difference between the actual net account balance of <damage type = "other">$246,600</damage> in September 1997 and the hypothetical balance of <damage type = "other">$321,100</damage> if those things had been done in accordance with the assumptions I have found reasonable and applied to estimate the account balance. This is <damage type = "other">$65,500</damage>.
103  I find this amount represents the damages which arise from Rogers' and Midland's failure to properly review Folklore account after May 1996, and advise Hawkenson to eliminate margin trading and reduce the "speculative" component to 40%.
104  Counsel for the defendants argued the application of the apportionment provisions s. 1 of the Negligence Act, R.S.B.C. 1996 c. 333 should reduce any award of damages on the basis of Hawkenson's alleged contributory negligence in failing to stem the losses by reacting to them on his own. I find s. 1 has no application in this case where a damage assessment is based on the Athey v. Leonati approach of assessing the probability of hypothetical facts. The issue at this stage of the analysis is not whether Hawkenson was negligent in not acting on his own to stop the losses in the Folklore account when there was no advice forthcoming from the defendants that he ought to do so. Rather it is the probability that he would have accepted and acted on prudent advice meeting the industry standard had it been provided as it ought to have been. I have already found it reasonable to assume he would have done so.
105  I find the defendants jointly and severally liable for damages in the amount of <damage type = "total">$65,500</damage> and costs on Scale 3, unless there has been an offer of settlement which would affect entitlement to costs.
E.R.A. EDWARDS J.
End of Document
Leweke v. Saanich School District No. 63, [2004] B.C.J. No. 1985
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Victoria, British Columbia
Meiklem J.
Heard: March 8 - 12 and 15, 2004.
Judgment: September 24, 2004.
Victoria Registry No. 01 5416
[2004] B.C.J. No. 1985   |
Between Paula Lynn Leweke, plaintiff, and Board of School Trustees of School District No. 63 (Saanich), defendant
(52 paras.)
Case Summary
Tort law — Negligence — Contributory negligence — Apportionment of liability — Occupiers' liability — Duty of occupier — Legislation.
Action by Leweke for damages against Saanich School District for injuries sustained when she fell from the bleachers in a high school gymnasium during a meet the teacher night. Leweke had attended the event in her work attire for her job as a nursing instructor, which included plastic dress shoes with 1-1/2 inch plastic heels. When climbing down from the third level bleacher, Leweke's foot slipped and she fell, sustaining severe multiple fractures of her left ankle. Leweke argued that Saanich breached its duties under the Occupier's Liability Act by failing to take reasonable care that she would be reasonably safe and failing to warn her of the dangerous condition of the bleachers. Saanich maintained that the bleachers were reasonably safe and that it did not fail in its statutory duties. It alternatively argued that the plaintiff's injuries were caused by her own negligence. 

HELD: Action dismissed.
 The bleachers were not proven to be unsafe and constituted an ordinary risk. They were not deficient in design or maintenance and did not contravene building code standards. Leweke failed to exercise the required care and attention by not turning her mind to her relatively slippery footwear and then subsequently not exercising the appropriate caution on the bleachers. Her negligence was the sole cause of the slip and fall.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Occupier's Liability Act, s. 3(1), 3(2).
Counsel
Counsel for the plaintiff: A. Sheane
Counsel for the defendant: D.C. McKay and K.T. Bhandar
MEIKLEM J.
NATURE OF THE CLAIM
1  The plaintiff seeks damages for injuries sustained when she fell from the second level of telescopic wooden bleachers at a high school gymnasium while attending a "Meet the Teacher Night" in September 2001. She sustained severe multiple fractures of her left ankle which she claims will significantly impact her future earnings as a nursing instructor.
2  Liability is disputed. Ms. Leweke claims that the defendant breached its duties under the Occupier's Liability Act R.S.B.C. 1996 377 (the "Act") by failing to take reasonable care that she would be reasonably safe in using the seating for parents in the school gymnasium, and failing to warn her of the dangerous condition of the premises.
3  The defendant maintains that the premises were reasonably safe and that it did not fail in its duty under the Act. The defendant alternatively argues that the plaintiff's fall and consequent injuries were caused wholly or in part by the plaintiff's negligence in failing to take reasonable care for her own safety, in wearing inappropriate footwear, and in failing to watch where she was placing her foot when exiting off the bleachers.
AGREED FACTS PERTAINING TO THE LIABILITY ISSUE
4  The parties agreed to the following facts relevant to the liability issue:
A Meet the Teacher Night was held on Wednesday, September 19, 2001, commencing at 7:00 p.m., at Claremont Secondary School (the "School").
At the material time, a Meet the Teacher Night was held twice each year at the School.
At the September 19, 2001 Meet the Teacher Night, the parents were directed to the School theatre for introductory comments and to meet with School administration.
After Meet the Teacher introductory comments were completed, parents, to include the plaintiff, were directed to pick up their child's student timetable in the hallway and to follow the timetable of classes and to meet with the teachers of those classes at the location designated on the timetable.
A buzzer would ring which would signal to the parent groups that the time for meeting with a particular teacher was concluded and the parents were to proceed to the next class on their child's timetable at the location set out in the timetable.
On the September 19, 2001 Meet the Teacher Night, Pamela Moore, the P.E. Teacher of the Plaintiff's daughter (the "Teacher") met the parents of her students in the large gymnasium of the School.
The Teacher had been employed by the School since 1983.
At all material times, the Teacher was aware that some of her students would have parents who worked outside of the home, and that some of her students came from single parent families.
At all material times, the Teacher was aware that the parents of students came in all shapes and sizes, had different levels of fitness, and ranged in age from the 30's through to the 50's. The Teacher had seen grandparents around the School as well.
At all material times, the Teacher was aware that some parents would be attending the Meet the Teacher Night in office or business attire.
On September 19, 2001, when the parents arrived in the large gymnasium to meet the Teacher, the Teacher directed the parents to be seated in wooden telescopic bleachers (the "Bleachers").
The Teacher had a very short time - ten to fifteen minutes - to be with her parent groups. The Teacher would get the core of the parents in and seated, wait a few minutes, and then begin speaking. She would have about ten minutes to go through a hand-out with each parent group.
The Teacher would stand on the gym floor facing the Bleachers. She would be located at the middle of the Bleachers, facing the parent group, while going through the handout with the parent groups.
On September 19, 2001, the Teacher had met with one parent group (the "First Parent Group") before she met with the plaintiff's parent group (the "Second Parent Group").
With the First Parent Group, the Teacher observed that parents came in to the gym and took seats close to where the Teacher was, the middle of the Bleachers, on the first, second and third rows of the Bleachers.
With the First Parent Group, the Teacher observed that there was room to sit in the front row of the Bleachers and, in spite of that, some parents went up to the second and third row of the Bleachers.
The Teacher did not watch parents from the First Parent Group climbing down from the Bleachers.
In prior years at Meet the Teacher Night, the Teacher observed that parents would come in to the large gymnasium and not know where to sit. They would climb up the Bleachers to the fourth row, or up to the top of the Bleachers.
In the plaintiff's daughter's P.E. class there were 26 students. The Teacher was aware that it was possible that 52 parents could attend for her talk.
When the plaintiff entered the large gymnasium, people from the Second Parent Group were already seated in the Bleachers.
When the plaintiff entered the large gymnasium, the Teacher had already started talking to the Second Parent Group.
Because the plaintiff had come in late, the Teacher did not have any handouts right there so she told the plaintiff that she could share a handout with another parent. The Teacher heard several parents offer to share their handout with the plaintiff. The Teacher asked the plaintiff to sit down.
The Teacher stopped her presentation for a minute and probably talked to the people in front of her while the plaintiff got situated. She did not watch the plaintiff climb up the bleachers.
The Teacher did not warn the plaintiff, or any parent, about any risks associated with the Bleachers, or make any attempt to stop the plaintiff, or any parent, from climbing up the Bleachers.
When the Teacher finished her talk to the Second Parent Group, she did not give any warning of risks associated with climbing down the Bleachers, or offer or ensure assistance to parents climbing down the Bleachers.
The only document given by the Claremont Secondary School Physical Education Department to parents, to include the plaintiff, in advance of and pertaining to the September 19, 2001 Meet the Teacher Night was a document entitled, "Claremont Secondary School Physical Education Department - P.E. 9/10 Program Guidelines & Policies".
The only document given to parents by Claremont Secondary School, to include the plaintiff, in advance of and pertaining to the September 19, 2001 Meet the Teacher Night was dated September 13, 2001 and entitled: "Update: Wednesday, September 19, 2001 MEET THE TEACHER NIGHT, 7 PM".
At the material times, there were no signs in the gymnasium warning that the Bleachers could be slippery or hazardous, or warning that rubber soled shoes were required on the Bleachers.
At all material times, the Teacher did not advise parents not to climb up to the third or fourth row of the Bleacher, or give any instruction as to where to sit on the Bleachers.
At all material times, in addition to the Bleachers, there were metal bleachers in the large gymnasium which were not in use.
At all material times, the metal bleachers were not used because the Bleachers were easier to set up and closer to the doors.
At all material times, there was nothing preventing the Teacher from using the metal bleachers.
At all material times, there were at least six to eight low benches available to the large and small gymnasiums and which were located in the large and small gymnasiums. The benches could be moved back and forth between the large and small gymnasiums.
At all material times, there was nothing preventing the Teacher from using some of the low benches.
At other School events, chairs are set up in the gymnasium. To use chairs in the gymnasium, the Teacher calls maintenance, maintenance staff bring the chairs to the gym, School students place mats on the gym floor, and the Teacher sets up the chairs.
Chairs are set out in the School large gymnasium for the athletic banquet and for the one-to-one parent teacher interviews.
At all material times, there was nothing preventing the Teacher from setting out chairs for parents.
Assuming the Bleachers were not in the gymnasium at the material times, or were "off limits", the Teacher could have arranged for other seating in the gymnasium. The Teacher could have seated the parent groups on a bench, on chairs, on the floor, or they could stand.
There was probably classroom space available at the School at the time the Teacher met with her parent groups in the gymnasium.
The defendant and the School do not know the name brand of the Bleachers from which the plaintiff fell.
The defendant and the School do not know when the Bleachers were installed in the gymnasium.
The defendant and the School do not know where or from whom the School obtained the Bleachers.
The defendant and the School have no manufacturer's literature, catalogues or plans for the Bleachers.
The defendant and the School have no records or knowledge regarding whether the Bleachers were ever assessed to ensure adherence to the Building Code.
The defendant and the School have no reports or records regarding any inspection or maintenance program for the Bleachers.
Records of incidents occurring at the School since 1983 are kept on file at the School. There are no records of incidents involving the Bleachers located in the incident file.
The Bleachers contain "raised cleats" measuring 3/4" x 3/4" x 8" located on the outside end of the "footstep" of each bleacher.
The Bleachers contain brackets designed to support handrails. The defendant does not use handrails. There are no handrails located at the School.
The Teacher did not use handrails, nor had seen handrails used, in all of the years she had been a teacher at the School.
NARRATIVE AND FURTHER EVIDENCE RELATING TO LIABILITY
5  Ms. Leweke is a single parent, a nursing instructor, aged 47 at the time of the accident slip, who attended in her work attire, which included dress shoes with plastic soles and 1-1/2 inches heels also made of plastic. Ms. Leweke had attended at the same bleachers on many prior occasions to watch her two children play basketball. On those occasions she "typically" wore running shoes or rubber-soled shoes.
6  On this Meet the Teacher Night Ms. Leweke had first attended the school theatre, then a science classroom before entering the gymnasium. She was one of the last parents to enter the gymnasium to join the group of parents being addressed by Ms. Moore. She climbed to the third bleacher seat in order to accept another parent's (Ms. Russell) offer to share the teacher's handout. Ms. Russell was on the second bleacher seat. Ms. Leweke did not recall anyone else being seated on the third row, Ms. Lucy, a witness who saw Ms. Leweke fall, and her husband were also seated on the third level.
7  Following the teacher's remarks, which took approximately 15 minutes, and were punctuated by the school bell ringing to signal a move on to another location, Ms. Leweke stood up and waited for the lower two levels to clear. She placed her right foot on the second level bleacher seat, (actually 5-3/4 inches higher than the foot well that her left foot would have been standing on, between the second and third level seats) and her foot slipped. Her impression was that her foot slipped forward because of the smoothness of the second level bleacher seat. She fell to the floor and somehow in the course of her fall her left foot was "jammed" behind or under the bottom level bleacher, fracturing her ankle.
8  Ms. Leweke testified that she did not put her mind to the fact that she was wearing her footwear from work. She attributed this in part to the "hectic" pace of the "Meet the Teacher Night" event.
THE EXPERT EVIDENCE
9  The plaintiff's expert, forensic engineer, Mr. Granville Airton, P. Eng. of Consulco Forensic Engineering Inc. attended the scene in June 2002, and examined and measured the bleachers and tested the slip resistance of the second level bleacher seat in the area where Ms. Leweke slipped. He utilized a part of the sole and the whole heel of Ms. Leweke's right shoe in the testing device, as well as friction blocks made of rubber, neolite, and leather for comparison. The coefficient of friction between the varnished wooden seat and Ms. Leweke's shoe heel was .27 and for the sole of her shoe it was .31. These coefficients of friction compare to the leather friction block's coefficient of .30, the neolite's coefficient of .64 and the coefficient with the rubber friction block of .66.
10  Mr. Airton's report cites a direction from a generally recognized expert Dr. Robert Brungraber that coefficients of friction produced by the Slip Test Mark II of lower than .35 are not acceptably slip resistant. Mr. Airton's report includes this passage:
These results indicate that although the coefficient of friction is satisfactory for rubber and Neolite on the subject varnished seating, it is lower than .35 for leather and the subject sole and heel materials and this is not reasonably slip resistant. This would explain why Ms. Leweke's right foot slipped out when she placed it on the second seat in the course of moving down to the floor of the gym.
11  Mr. Airton also makes reference to the primary thrust of provincial and national building codes with regard to getting people out of buildings safely in times of emergencies such as fires or earthquakes. He suggests that surfaces that occupants walk on or climb down must be safe for all kinds of footwear that could realistically be expected to be used at the time of an emergency, which he suggests includes the plastic sole and heel materials used on Ms. Leweke's shoes.
12  Mr. Airton's report also stated the opinion that the bleachers did not comply with the requirements of the applicable building code in that, by his measurements, the vertical distance between the seats exceeded the allowable 280 mm. (about 11 inches). Mr. Airton measured the vertical distance between the first and second level at 11-1/8 inches and between the second and third level at 11-1/4 inches. (I will refer later to contradictory evidence from the defendant's engineer.)
13  The applicable code requires an intermediate step to be provided in aisles where the vertical distance between seats exceeds the stated limit. There are no aisles in these bleachers, which causes Mr. Airton to conclude that the whole of the bleachers constitutes an aisle for the purposes of the code. It is unclear to me how it would be possible to install an intermediate step in the foot well of the bleachers themselves, as these bleachers are designed, because the horizontal width of the foot well is only 13 inches, and an intermediate step would preclude the use of the foot well.
14  In any event, Ms. Leweke's slip did not occur as she was stepping from seat to seat. She was stepping up to the seat platform immediately in front of the foot well that her feet occupied while she was seated. If there was a non-compliance with the building code it played no role in her slip and fall.
15  Mr. Airton pointed out that the bleachers had sleeves for installation of removable guardrails and the building code required guardrail protection for bleacher seats more than 1.2 m. above the floor. Although Ms. Leweke was sitting lower than 1.2 m. above the floor, Mr. Airton's opinion is that if a guardrail was installed to comply with the code it would probably have utilized the sleeves at the lower levels below the legal requirement, and would have been available to assist Ms. Leweke if she had moved closer to the end of the bleachers as she began to leave.
16  While I agree that Ms. Leweke may well have utilized a guardrail or handrail if one was installed in excess of the code requirement, the non-compliance with guarding requirements of the code for the seats above 1.2 m. played no role in her accident and it is speculative to conclude that a compliant occupier would have installed a guard below the required limit.
17  The defendant countered Mr. Airton's report with a report from Craig Brown P. Eng. of MacInnes Engineering Associates Ltd.
18  Mr. Brown's measurements of vertical distances between seating differ from Mr. Airton's. Mr. Brown measured the elevations of the respective seat levels relative to the floor at three points on each level and determined an average vertical distance of 265 mm. with a maximum of 271 mm. This appears to be a more accurate methodology than Mr. Airton's. Mr. Airton used a spirit level to measure seat-to-seat levels.
19  Mr. Brown used a different device, known as an English Variable Incident Tribometer (VIT) to test the coefficient of friction of the bleacher seats in October 2003. This device uses a friction disk of neolite, and tests were done at two positions on each of the four lower seats. The average coefficient of friction was .60 with a range of .54 to .70. This result is comparable to Mr. Airton's finding of .64 neolite with the different testing device.
20  Mr. Brown's report provides comparable coefficients of friction for several other walking surfaces tested, such as .62 for exposed aggregate concrete, .63 for 2-year old heavily used textured vinyl sheet linoleum, .70 for polished marble, and .71 for painted ceramic tile on stairs. He also makes reference to Dr. Brungraber's discussion paper referring to a coefficient of friction of .5 as a generally safe criterion for shoes and walkway surfaces, but pointing out that slightly lower levels of friction may be acceptable on stairs. (Due to a person's body geometry while using stairs, which does not involve striking the heel first.)
21  Mr. Brown tested Ms. Leweke's left shoe material on various floor surfaces, including maple and oak, both as-purchased and scuffed with steel wool to simulate wear, and on vinyl composition tile. In the case of as-purchased maple, her sole was equivalent to vegetable tanned sole leather with a coefficient of friction of .33, which he described as "low and could be hazardous if unexpected". On the other surfaces her sole provided friction that was only 53 to 72% of the friction provided by leather on the same surface. On as-purchased oak, the coefficient of friction was .31 -.33, whereas leather was .43 -.47. On vinyl composition tile it was .32 compared to .60 for leather.
22  Mr. Brown's friction test results on Ms. Leweke's sole material are consistent with Mr. Airton's. Mr. Brown did not test the friction of the heel material, which Mr. Airton found provided even less friction than the sole. He testified that he did not do so because he understood Ms. Leweke was stepping down and the heel would not be a factor. His understanding was in error on this point, because Ms. Leweke was, in fact, stepping up with her right foot to the second level seat, which was, as I have noted, 5-3/4 inches higher than the foot well where her feet had been.
23  Mr. Brown concluded:
Comparing these friction values to the Brungraber criterion of .5 indicates that [Ms. Leweke's] sole material can be hazardous on many surfaces.
24  I note that Mr. Airton's report speaks of Dr. Brungraber's direction or criterion of a .35 coefficient of friction and Mr. Brown's spoke of Dr. Brungraber's criterion of .5. The discussion paper referred by Mr. Brown indicates that Dr. Brungraber refers to the two criteria in different contexts. Dr. Brungraber refers to Sidney James of Underwriters Laboratories as setting a standard coefficient of .5 for floor polishes that was first adopted by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission in 1953 and finally by ASTM D2047 about 1960. He then says:
When setting the standard of .5 that appears in ASTM D2047, James doubtless used test results made with his device on floors that had given satisfactory service. Later anthropometric and kineseologic studies have shown that for most people, wearing heels of modest height, and taking normal strides, a minimum value of .3 to .4 is needed just to prevent slip. Thus the .5 value includes a factor of safety of 1.3 to 1.7.
25  Mr. Brown's report contains the following reasoning:
A reference by Brungraber et al is a discussion paper regarding walking surfaces. The authors discuss a coefficient of friction of .5 as a generally safe criterion for shoes and walking surfaces. The paper points out, however, that slightly lower levels of friction may be acceptable on stairs.
It follows that the average friction value measured by the English VIT of 0.60 for the bleacher seats indicates a surface that should provide adequate slip resistance for ascending or descending.
26  This reasoning depends to some extent on the erroneous understanding that Ms. Leweke was stepping down the bleachers as if descending stairs, that is, using primarily the sole and not the heel for weight bearing. In fact, while her intended subsequent movement would obviously have been a step down, she was, at the time she slipped, obviously applying weight to her right foot on the seat platform in front of, and higher than, the level of the foot well in order to be standing on the second level seat platform before descending to the first level. If she were doing so as the first upward step in an ascent of stairs, she naturally would have used her sole for weight bearing. However, in the circumstances she would have been intending to either bring her left foot up to the same platform and stand on both feet briefly before stepping down with either her right foot or her left foot or use her right footing as a balance point as she raised her left foot up and over the second level seat platform and down to the first level seat platform. I think that it is more likely that she was intending the former, since common sense indicates that the latter is a more difficult movement, requiring balance to be maintained as the body is first lifted up and then down while standing on one leg. In either case, she was much more likely to involve her heel in the weight bearing in order to maintain balance than would a person continuously ascending or descending stairs.
27  It is also noteworthy that the bleachers were not ordinary stairs. Not only was the vertical distance between them near the maximum 11 inches, but there was a 13 inch horizontal distance between the leading edge of each seat platform and the trailing edge of the next one. The platforms were 9-1/4 inches wide. Therefore, a person's horizontal movement for each step taken if the seat platforms were used as stairs would be 22-1/4 inches. Common sense suggests this would, even for someone descending the seating platforms as stairs on the balls of their feet, increase the horizontal forces at the point of contact over those that would occur on ordinary stairs.
28  Thus the opinion that slightly lower levels of friction may be acceptable on stairs is probably not applicable in the circumstances of this case, in my view.
29  On the other hand there is no expert evidence that suggests these bleachers should have a higher coefficient of friction than a floor in order to be acceptably safe. Mr. Brown's report indicates that there is no directly applicable test standard to determine the required friction characteristics of these bleachers, and he said: "Since the bleachers are not a means of egress from a building, building codes regarding exits do not apply".
30  The two expert reports, taken together, support the following additional conclusions:
The coefficient of friction of Ms. Leweke's right shoe sole on the bleacher seat surface was .31, as compared to .30 for leather and .64 for neolite;
The coefficient of friction of Ms. Leweke's right shoe heel on the bleacher seat surface was .27;
The coefficient of friction of the bleacher seat surface and neolite was marginally less than exposed aggregate concrete and textured vinyl sheet linoleum;
The coefficient of friction of Ms. Leweke's sole and the bleacher seat surface (.31) was approximately equivalent to the coefficient of friction between her sole and as-purchased pre-finished solid maple (.33) and oak parquet flooring (.31-.33) and as-purchased vinyl composition tile (.32);
I infer that Ms. Leweke's heel would have a coefficient of friction on the maple, oak and vinyl composition tile roughly equivalent to its .27 coefficient on the bleacher seat surface.
ANALYSIS OF THE LIABILITY ISSUE
The Standard of Care Required of Occupiers
31  Sub-sections 3(1) and 3(2) of the Occupier's Liability Act R.S.B.C. 1996 Chapter 337 set out both the duty of care and the standard of care owed by an occupier to persons entering on premises:
An occupier of premises owes a duty to take that care that in all the circumstances of the case is reasonable to see that a person, . . . will be reasonably safe in using the premises.
The duty of care referred to in subsection (1) applies in relation to the
condition of the premises,
activities on the premises, or
conduct of third parties on the premises.
32  The law is clear that there need not be an unusual danger, and that the focus of the standard of care is to the safety of the visitor: see Weiss v. YMCA of Greater Vancouver,  (B.C.C.A.). It is now equally clear that the visitors' familiarity with the premises and awareness of their condition, while always a factor to be considered in relation to voluntary assumption of risk or contributory negligence, does not absolve an occupier who has failed to meet the standard of care and that failure has caused injury; only a consent to the legal risk, in effect a waiver of legal rights, will absolve the occupier of unsafe premises: see Waldick v. Malcolm, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 456, interpreting "risks willingly assumed", the phrase contained in the Occupiers Liability Act of our province and in similar statutes in other jurisdictions.
The Arguments
33  There is no suggestion in this case of the plaintiff willingly assuming any risk in the sense that the law recognizes as absolving the occupier of liability.
34  The plaintiff argued that the defendant was negligent in seating the plaintiff on the bleachers at Meet the Teacher Night, and should have used an alternative meeting room or different seating, considering the absence of guardrails or slip-resistant paint or strips on the bleacher seats which rendered them unsafe, and also negligent in failing to provide a warning of risk or requiring rubber-soled shoes on the bleachers. It is argued that nothing more than common sense was needed to foresee the risks of harm posed by the bleachers for the seating of parents of unknown physical capabilities who might foreseeably be attending in office clothing.
35  The defendant denies the premises were unsafe or that the defendant failed to meet the standard of care and the defendant takes issue with the reasonableness of the plaintiff's explanation of how she fell.
Discussion
36  The only independent witness called by the plaintiff as to her fall was Ms. Josephson. She was sitting on the second row of bleacher seats and she heard a commotion, turned to her right and saw Ms. Leweke in mid-fall, falling forward.
37  The defendant called Ms. Lucy, a parent in the third or fourth row of seats in an adjacent set of bleachers. She said she saw Ms. Leweke going from vertical, then falling, and she saw the course of the fall, but did not see her catch her foot during the fall. In examination-in-chief she said she saw Ms. Leweke falling forward and to her left, but in cross-examination she agreed she pitched backwards and to the left. This seems consistent with Ms. Leweke's evidence of her right foot slipping.
38  The defendant also called the physical education teacher, Ms. Moore. After concluding her speech to the group, she was speaking to an individual parent on the floor and "out of the corner of her eye" saw Ms. Leweke wavering on the second level and then fall to the floor. She demonstrated the wavering as a forward and backward tilting motion.
39  The defendant also called Ms. MacNeil, a former friend of the plaintiff and wife of a teacher that Ms. Leweke had complained about in writing to his principal. She denied suggestions of bias against the plaintiff and testified about Ms. Leweke's frequency of attending at the gymnasium and sitting in the wooden bleachers. She also testified that she and Ms. Leweke occasionally sat together on the bleacher seat where the plaintiff's fall occurred, and she had noted that Ms. Leweke sometimes struggled to maintain balance. Ms. MacNeil had seen her waiver at times and put out a hand to steady her. On one occasion she said: "Paula, why do you do this to yourself?" and received the response that Ms. Leweke wanted to sit up higher.
40  Ms. Leweke is a relatively large woman who stated upon hospitalization that she weighed 208 pounds. She stated she was 5'10" in height, but Dr. Morton reported her as 5'9-1/2" and Dr. Yoneda reported her as 5'8-1/2".
41  The defendant agreed that the plaintiff's evidence on the mechanics of her fall is inconceivable because if her left foot remained in the foot well between the third and second bleacher seats when her right foot slipped, it would be impossible for her left foot to end up in the foot well between the first and second seat, as she indicated. The defendant's theory in cross-examining the plaintiff was that she stood up on the second bleacher, lost her balance and fell forward.
42  In fairness to Ms. Leweke as a witness, she was unable to explain where her left foot was when she slipped. She was not cross-examined in minute detail as to her perceptions of her body position at very phase of her slip and fall. It would probably have been a non-persuasive endeavour, perhaps even futile, because no one can be expected to do much more than reconstruct the sequence of such an unexpected and rapid occurrence from a small number of discrete reliable recollections. Clearly, in order for slippage of her right foot to cause her to fall, she must have by the time of the slip transferred a good deal of her weight, perhaps all of it, to that foot. Her evidence was not so specific as to state that she was still standing on her left foot in the foot well and it is very unlikely that she was. She may have raised her left foot sufficiently that when her right foot slipped forward and she pitched backwards as stated by Ms. Lucy, her left foot cleared the second bleacher seat and came forward into the lower foot well and was caught, as she fell downward.
43  We will never know the full mechanical details of Ms. Leweke's mishap, but I find her recollection of her right foot slipping forward is probably reliable. The only evidence supporting the defendant's theory is that of Ms. Moore, together with inferences from Ms. MacNeil. Ms. Moore's evidence, however, is not necessarily inconsistent with the plaintiff's and was not a direct observation. Her evidence that the plaintiff had both feet in the foot well at the time is most improbable. I do find, however, that lack of proper balance probably played a role in her losing her footing in conjunction with her size and her footwear, which was clearly inappropriate and hazardous for negotiating wooden bleachers.
44  The plaintiff must prove not only a breach of the standard of care, in other words, negligence, but also that the negligence was the cause of her fall.
45  The plaintiff's argument is basically that the defendant, with positive inquiry and assessment should have known the bleachers were unsafe for the purposes of seating the parents and should have provided alternative seating or an alternative meeting place, or at the very least should have warned the attendees of the poor slip-resistance of the bleachers. This argument is wholly dependent on first establishing that the bleachers were unsafe for the purposes of seating the parents. The unsafe nature is said to be the low coefficient of friction between the bleachers and plastic or leather-soled footwear, that is, its degree of slip-resistance to such footwear.
46  The expert evidence establishes that the slip-resistance of the bleachers to Ms. Leweke's plastic soles was effectively equivalent to that of new hardwood or vinyl tile flooring. Looking at the polished hardwood floors depicted in the photographic evidence of the bleachers in the gymnasium, one would expect the bleachers to be of a similar slipperiness.
47  Ms. Leweke had been in the gymnasium and on the bleachers many times, "typically" in running shoes, she testified. I expect her choice of footwear on those occasions when she knew in advance that she was attending the gymnasium was partly a matter of respect for the flooring as well as for her own comfort. Although on this occasion she clearly did not anticipate in advance having to go to the gymnasium, she fully knew what to expect when that need became apparent.
48  Any adult with common sense knows that smooth, hard-soled shoes such as those made of leather or plastic are not slip-resistant on many surfaces and require special care when walking or moving about. Common sense also suggests that bleachers require careful "negotiation", (to use Ms. MacNeil's apt description), something that in Ms. Leweke's case was verified by her frequent prior use. By her own admission, Ms. Leweke was oblivious to the fact she was wearing her dress shoes. The obvious inference is that she would not, therefore, have been taking the required extra care.
49  An occupier does not have a duty to warn adults of the ordinary risks of everyday life: see Malcolm v. British Columbia Transit,  (B.C.C.A.) and Choromanski v. Malaspina University College,  (B.C.S.C.). In my view the bleachers themselves have not been proven unsafe and constituted an ordinary risk. It is significant that with an estimated 10,000 users per year over at least 20 years, the school had not recorded a single incident of injury on the bleachers.
CONCLUSION ON LIABILITY
50  The plaintiff has not established that the bleachers were deficient in design or maintenance or contravened any applicable building code standards that had any causal relationship to the mishap. There are no slip-resistance standards applicable to bleachers and the slip-resistance of the bleachers has not been demonstrated to be unsafe, provided that the user exercises the extra care and attention that the ordinary risks associated with bleachers requires.
51  Ms. Leweke failed to exercise the required care and attention by not turning her mind to her relatively slippery footwear and then subsequently not exercising the appropriate caution on the bleachers. In my view, her own negligence was the sole cause of the slip and fall and I find no departure from the required standard of care on the part of the defendant. The plaintiff's action is dismissed, with costs.
52  In the event that I had found the defendant negligent on the basis that the appropriate standard of care would have required some sort of warning to parents not to climb the bleachers in smooth hard-soled dress shoes, I would have apportioned liability 80% to the plaintiff and 20% to the defendant. I would have assessed the following damages, before apportionment:
 Non pecuniary Damages <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$ 50,000.00</damage> 
 Loss of Earning Capacity <damage type = "future wage loss">$ 300,000.00</damage> 
 Cost of Future Care <damage type = "future care">$ 114,700.00</damage> 
 Part Wage Loss (agreed) <damage type = "past wage loss">$ 77,844.00</damage> 
 Special Damages (agreed) <damage type = "special">$ 6,472.28</damage> 
 TOTAL: <damage type = "total">$ 549,016.28</damage> 
 Karim v. Li, [2015] B.C.J. No. 618
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
P. Abrioux J.
Heard: January 26-30, and February 2-5, 2015.
Judgment: April 1, 2015.
Docket: M130501
Registry: Vancouver
[2015] B.C.J. No. 618   |      |      |      |
Between Keyhan Ali Karim, Plaintiff, and Sang Li and Sen Qing Jiang, Defendants
(178 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Body injuries — Back and spine — Neck — Soft tissue — Psychological injuries — Considerations impacting on award — Degree of impairment — Age of claimant — Pre-existing injury — Determination of damages for injuries arising from motor vehicle accident — Plaintiff was awarded $100,000 in non-pecuniary damages and $100,000 for loss of future earning capacity — 29-year-old plaintiff's vehicle was stopped when it was struck from behind — He suffered neck and back pain — Plaintiff suffered moderate to moderately severe soft tissue injuries that had physical and psychological consequences — Stress of injuries aggravated stuttering condition — Injuries were instrumental in ending relationship — He should largely return to pre-accident level of functioning with treatment.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Considerations — Aggravation of pre-existing injury — Extent of incapacity — Loss of earning capacity — Non-pecuniary loss — Determination of damages for injuries arising from motor vehicle accident — Plaintiff was awarded $100,000 in non-pecuniary damages and $100,000 for loss of future earning capacity — 29-year-old plaintiff's vehicle was stopped when it was struck from behind — He suffered neck and back pain — Plaintiff suffered moderate to moderately severe soft tissue injuries that had physical and psychological consequences — Stress of injuries aggravated stuttering condition — Injuries were instrumental in ending relationship — He should largely return to pre-accident level of functioning with treatment.
Determination of damages for injuries arising from a motor vehicle accident. The 29-year-old plaintiff's vehicle was stopped at a stop light when it was struck from behind and pushed into the vehicle in front of it. He suffered neck and back pain as a result of the accident. He worked at a hotel at the time of the accident and had discussed marriage with his girlfriend. He was off work for a year as a result of the accident and his employment was terminated soon after his return because he was unable to do heavy duties. He found similar work at another hotel and asked for light duties, but none were available, so he was not working at the time of trial, but his position was still available to him. His relationship with the girlfriend ended and they lost the deposit that they paid for the wedding venue. He had a longstanding stuttering condition. 

HELD: The plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$100,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages, <damage type = "past wage loss">$41,600</damage> for past loss of income, <damage type = "future wage loss">$100,000</damage> for loss of future earning capacity, <damage type = "future care">$16,960</damage> for cost of future care and <damage type = "special">$2119</damage> in special damages.
 The plaintiff suffered moderate to moderately severe soft tissue injuries that had physical and psychological consequences. The stress of the injuries aggravated the stuttering condition. The injuries were instrumental in ending the relationship with the girlfriend, increasing his stress and greatly affecting his quality of life for a while. He should largely return to his pre-accident level of functioning with treatment. The award for loss of future earning capacity was assessed using the earnings approach and was equivalent to slightly more than two years' wages over his working life. The award for cost of future care included amounts for a residential multi-disciplinary pain clinic and an intensive speech therapy course. The wedding costs were too remote.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Insurance (Vehicle) Act,
Counsel
Counsel for Plaintiff: K. Sadler.
Counsel for Defendants: M.G. Murphy, J. Wittig.
Table of Contents
I: INTRODUCTION
II: BACKGROUND
A. Pre-Accident
B. The Accident
C. Injuries Sustained in the Accident
D. Post-Accident
THE MEDICAL EVIDENCE
A. Overview
B. Dr. Eichhorst
C. Dr. Gouws
D. Dr. Paramonoff
E. Dr. Nader and Dr. Lau
F. Dr. Riar and Dr. Miller
G. Wendy Duke
H. Derek Nordin
IV: THE PARTIES' POSITIONS
A: The Plaintiff
B: The Defendants
V: CREDIBILITY
VI. CAUSATION
A. Principles of Causation B. Psychological Injury
VII: DUTY TO MITIGATE
VIII: FINDINGS OF FACT AND CONCLUSIONS ON THE EVIDENCE
IX: ASSESSMENT OF DAMAGES
A: Introduction
B: Non-pecuniary Damages
C: Past Income Loss Including Past Loss of Earning Capacity
D: Loss of Future Earning Capacity
E: Cost of Future Care
F: Special Damages
X: CONCLUSION
Reasons for Judgment
P. ABRIOUX J.
I: INTRODUCTION 
1  The plaintiff, Keyhan Ali Karim, was injured in a motor vehicle accident on August 10, 2011 (the "Accident"). The defendants have admitted liability so only damages are in issue.
2  Mr. Karim alleges he has chronic pain arising from neck and back injuries sustained in the Accident. These include both physical and psychological consequences. The stress caused by his injuries is said to have aggravated a serious stuttering condition that he has had for most of his life.
3  The issues in this proceeding are:
the nature of the plaintiff's injuries, which include determining his "original position" prior to the Accident;
the extent to which his post-Accident difficulties were caused by the Accident;
his damages to the date of trial; and
how the injuries caused by the Accident will affect him in future.
4  The plaintiff seeks almost <damage type = "other">$1 million</damage> in damages.
II: BACKGROUND 
5  Much of the factual background is not in dispute. What follows includes certain edited excerpts from the parties' written submissions.
A. Pre-Accident
6  The plaintiff is 29 years old. He was born in Iraq and moved to England when he was approximately 17 years old. He has lived in Canada since July 2008 when he moved here with his first wife, Zara.
7  Mr. Karim was the subject of a gas attack when he was approximately two years old. He was kept in hospital for a few years recovering. The plaintiff remembers nothing of this gas attack and he believes he completely recovered from this incident while still a young boy.
8  The plaintiff was also hit in the head with the blunt side of an axe in an accident when he was young. He testified to having completely recovered from that incident with only residual pain to the back of his head and the occasional headache thereafter.
9  Mr. Karim has had a longstanding stuttering condition since he was a young boy. The cause of this condition remains unknown and he continues to stutter to date. In 2009, he engaged in a comprehensive remedial stuttering program and has undergone additional programs since then.
10  Mr. Karim has demonstrated a willingness to work over the years. He first began to earn an income while still a boy. As he reached his late teens, he was usually employed full-time while pursuing his education. He often had a second job.
11  The plaintiff immigrated to England in 2002. There he completed his "O" Levels. He then completed two years of a four-year business program.
12  He also worked for several hotels in England. He worked reception and on night duties and attended school during the day. He also did some renovations for the owner.
13  The plaintiff owned a restaurant in England with his aunt. He was in school at the time taking carpentry, plumbing, and electrical courses but did assist his aunt from time to time in the restaurant.
14  Mr. Karim immigrated to Canada when he was 25 years old. He and his wife separated thereafter and divorced in 2011.
15  During the first years following his immigration to Canada, the plaintiff's primary employment and primary work interest was in the renovation, maintenance, and construction industry. He was diligent in obtaining employment. At times he also had a second job in the evenings and on weekends. Such secondary work was often for family members and he testified he would receive a benefit such as reduced rent, for example, during the timeframe he assisted his former mother-in-law with certain real property she owned.
16  The plaintiff had an interest in cameras and news reporting. He took some photography courses at Langara College and at BCIT. He did some camera work and report writing for his aunt in his spare time. He purchased some equipment in the amount of approximately <damage type = "other">$14,800</damage> for this purpose. He testified that his aunt used the value of his work to purchase real estate in Iraq.
17  In May 2010, Mr. Karim commenced full-time employment at the Best Western Abercorn Inn ("Abercorn") in Richmond, British Columbia. His duties varied from simple tasks such as changing light bulbs to heavier tasks such as painting, repairing drywall, lifting furniture, and performing mattress rotations.
18  Ms. Meggy Ho, the plaintiff's manager at Abercorn, described his pre-Accident work as being very good. He would rarely refuse the extra shifts he was asked to work.
19  The plaintiff also worked at approximately three renovation jobs with a Mr. Basty Sophi prior to the Accident. Mr. Sophi testified that the plaintiff's work was of a very high quality. Mr. Sophi also observed the plaintiff playing soccer prior to the Accident. He described his ability to be "pretty good" and "physical" with "no complaints of physical pain".
20  In the beginning of 2010, during the timeframe the plaintiff and his first wife were divorcing, he met Ms. Tara Azimi. They enjoyed time together on evenings and weekends as time permitted. Ms. Azimi described the plaintiff's pre-Accident personality as "active, super calm, friendly, not easy to get angered and ambitious". Ms. Azimi testified that the plaintiff performed a large heavy granite tile installation job for her family before the Accident.
21  Ms. Azimi stated that, prior to the Accident, she and the plaintiff had discussed getting married and having a family. With the financial assistance of her family, they planned on purchasing an older home for them to live in which Mr. Karim would renovate.
22  The plaintiff's recreational activities prior to the Accident included playing soccer and hiking with both Mr. Sophi and Ms. Azimi.
B. The Accident
23  The plaintiff was stopped behind another vehicle at a stop light when he was struck from behind and pushed into the vehicle in front of him. Damage to his vehicle was assessed at approximately <damage type = "other">$14,500.00</damage>. Damage to the defendant's vehicle was assessed at approximately <damage type = "other">$12,000.00</damage>.
C. Injuries Sustained in the Accident
24  The plaintiff claims to have sustained physical and psychological/psychiatric injuries from the Accident. These include:
his left arm and right leg, with tingling and numbing sensation in his left arm;
chronic myofascial neck pain;
chronic mechanical/discogenic low back pain;
headaches and insomnia;
exacerbation of his pre-Accident stuttering condition; and
a major depressive disorder and pain disorder.
D. Post-Accident
25  At the time of trial, the plaintiff's neck and back pain continued to be his most significant injuries. He testified they severely impacted his mood and his ability to sleep, work, and function.
26  Soon after the Accident, the plaintiff attempted to return to work at Abercorn. He testified he was unable to perform his physical duties. He was off work for a total period of approximately one year. When he did return, he said he had considerable difficulty doing so. After a change in ownership at the hotel, he was terminated from his employment in May 2013. Ms. Ho, testified the reason for termination was performance-related in that, due to the plaintiff's back pain, he was unable to perform the heavy duties required of his work.
27  One month after leaving Abercorn, the plaintiff obtained a position working as a maintenance coordinator with Sunrise Senior Living ("Sunrise") in North Vancouver, British Columbia. This required him to supervise and manage the maintenance team. He testified he was not suited to a managerial position. The physical injuries sustained in the Accident made it difficult for him to perform that aspect of his job responsibilities. He testified that he was able to keep the position for as long as he did since he had a very supportive supervisor. When she left Sunrise, he was terminated soon thereafter. This was in March 2014.
28  In September 2014, the plaintiff commenced employment with the Sandman Hotel ("Sandman") where his work is very similar to the job he had with Abercorn. His supervisor, Mr. Lopez, testified that heavy lifting is required from time to time.
29  Mr. Lopez also stated that the other maintenance worker had outperformed the plaintiff. For his part, the plaintiff stated that shortly before the trial he asked to be placed on light duties due to his ongoing problems with back pain. No such duties were available and he was not working at the time of trial, although his position is still available to him.
30  Mr. Lopez expressed concern for the plaintiff's future at the Sandman and in the hotel maintenance industry in general since light duties are not available in that kind of employment.
31  Ms. Azimi testified she began to notice a change in the plaintiff after the Accident when he was physically failing in his attempts to return to work. She testified he was no longer the happy, outgoing, active and ambitious man he was prior to the Accident. Rather, he became "hopeless and depressed". Ms. Azimi stated Mr. Karim was in pain, stressed, and irritable. He was suffering from financial pressures and physically he was not doing well.
32  Ms. Azimi stated these changes in the plaintiff caused them to grow apart. As such, they did not celebrate their wedding as they had planned and they lost the deposits paid for the venue and incurred out-of-pocket expenses. The venue is demanding further payment. Ms. Azimi said it is the plaintiff who is ultimately responsible for paying these costs.
33  The plaintiff's stuttering condition is an issue in this proceeding. He had received treatment prior to the Accident and he alleges that the Accident worsened this condition. In particular, it is a source of anxiety and contributed to difficulties when he was employed in a management position, attending staff meetings and the like.
34  The plaintiff's stutter has been prevalent from infancy. Its onset may well have originated at about the time of the gas attack he suffered as a child. He spent a protracted period of time in and out of hospital and it was during this timeframe that he suffered the onset of an illness of unknown cause which affected his strength and sense of balance until he relocated to England. He told his speech therapist, Ms. Duke, that during this stage of his life he had difficulty walking and felt his bones were weak.
35  According to Mr. Karim, his stutter was present while he lived in England and he did want to have it cured. Notwithstanding this, he stated he was popular amongst his peers and that the stutter did not hold him back in the pursuit of his goals.
36  Ms. Duke's interview sheet includes historical interview questions, such as, "Has your stuttering hampered your educational and/or occupational progress? If so, how?" to which the recorded response is "Yes-dropped out of University". On cross-examination, Mr. Karim denied the suggestion that he dropped out of university due to his stutter and indicated that what he advised Ms. Duke is that he did not pursue a better degree due to his stutter.
37  In 2009, the plaintiff first attended Columbia Speech and Language Services ("Columbia"). His stutter was noted to be "severe". Upon completion of the course, the remedial treatment was considered successful, though "fragile". Columbia encourages those who attend its programs to maintain certain strategies in order to assist in dealing with the condition in the future. This includes attendance at regular "refresher" courses. Mr. Karim did attend some of these prior and subsequent to the Accident.
38  The aggravation of the stutter post-Accident appears to have first manifested itself approximately ten months thereafter.
39  Mr. Karim testified that he had great difficulty expressing himself while working at Sunrise and speculated that this may have been a contributing factor to his dismissal.
40  He also told Ms. Duke that he was convinced he would never get a job if he were to advise a potential employer, during an interview, of his stuttering. The plaintiff's vocational consultant, Derek Nordin, was of the view that one of Mr. Karim's barriers to work is his stutter.
41  And yet Mr. Karim's evidence on cross-examination was that, notwithstanding his stuttering condition, he was the successful candidate for both the Sunrise and the Sandman positions.
42  According to the plaintiff, the stutter worsens with stress. One of the intriguing aspects of this issue is that the stutter markedly improves when Mr. Karim is angry or upset. The condition is variable and the plaintiff appears to have some real ability to control its effects.
43  I note that during the plaintiff's examination-in-chief there were occasions when the stutter had a significant impact on the manner in which Mr. Karim testified with long interruptions in the flow of his speech. And yet, during portions of his cross-examination when his evidence was being tested and he was upset or angry at the tenor of the questions, the stutter was almost non-existent for lengthy periods of time.
44  It was the plaintiff's evidence that he is unable to perform many of the recreational activities he was involved in prior to the Accident. With the exception of going to the gym, he leads a sedentary existence since the pain he experiences every day prevents him from functioning the way he once did. He no longer associates with friends like he used to. He is also unable to take on extra work like he did prior to the Accident. He does not believe he has the capability to buy and renovate a house.
45  Mr. Karim began attending counselling therapy sessions approximately 14 months after the Accident. He then discontinued the treatments. He resumed counselling a month prior to the trial. He plans on continuing this treatment.
III. THE MEDICAL EVIDENCE
A. Overview
46  As a consequence of the Accident, Mr. Karim had a number of musculoskeletal complaints including headaches, right leg pain, and neck and back pain. The majority of these appear to have resolved except for the neck and back complaints.
47  These injuries have been diagnosed by Dr. Nicholas Eichhorst and Dr. Daniel Gouws as chronic myofascial neck and back pain. Dr. Catherine Paramonoff describes musculoligamentous neck pain and lower back pain from musculoligamentous sources at the lumbar sacral region.
48  There have also been certain psychological and/or psychiatric consequences arising from the Accident, although their duration and potential effect on Mr. Karim's functioning is very much in dispute.
B. Dr. Eichhorst
49  Dr. Eichhorst is the plaintiff's general practitioner. He was of the opinion that Mr. Karim had a chronic pain condition secondary to soft tissue injuries. He testified that he oversaw the plaintiff's treatment and his attempts to return to work since the Accident. He was of the view that Mr. Karim's efforts were reasonable in the circumstances. He stated that he recommended a course of physiotherapy and rehabilitation treatments which Mr. Karim followed. He also recommended psychological treatment. He stated that the plaintiff's presentation is consistent with 10% of individuals who do not recover from this type of injury.
C. Dr. Gouws
50  Dr. Gouws has an expertise in occupational health and performs medical fitness to work assessments.
51  He assessed the plaintiff in 2013 during his termination from Abercorn and before he obtained a position at Sunrise. He found Mr. Karim to be capable of employment with light physical demands rather than medium and/or heavy physical requirements as required for the job of a handyman or maintenance worker.
52  Dr. Gouws' physical examination demonstrated essentially normal findings with subjective complaints of pain. He administered a series of questionnaires the results of which, in part, he considered contradictory.
53  Dr. Gouws noted that the plaintiff had "developed a chronic pain condition with emotional comorbidities that significantly impacts his ability to work in a sustained and productive way and negatively impact his quality of life."
54  In his report, Dr. Gouws was also of the opinion that:
Mr. Karim's lack of Canadian academic credentials represents a significant limitation in terms of his successful return to the workforce or ability to seek out alternative employment;
the plaintiff's "lack of physical abilities and the negative effects of his chronic pain condition (such as low energy, low mood and reduced tolerance for activity) will make it very difficult for him to find work in the open job market";
Mr. Karim scored highly on the pain catastrophization scale and pain disability index and scored in the very high range on the kinesiophobia scale. His overly negative perception of his own mental and physical abilities, his fixation on his problems and limitations, his pain focus and fear of re-injury are all associated with poor rehabilitation outcome. These perceptions are often due to the effects of the chronic pain condition itself and not the wilful response on the part of the injured individual; and
he has had extensive and appropriate treatments, investigations, therapies, rehabilitation, and counselling as well as appropriate attempts to return to work. In view of his significant degree of functional impairment, he is at high risk of becoming permanently disabled from returning to the type of work that he was capable of prior to the Accident.
55  Dr. Gouws recommended a multidisciplinary pain program and testified that the pain program is a full-time engagement. He stated that the goal is to assist the individual to deal with the pain, and that it "perhaps" could result in getting someone to return to work to earn an income; however, it is not possible that the participant will return to work at the same degree -- rather the participant would return at lighter duties.
56  During his evidence, Dr. Gouws stated that:
notwithstanding his treatment, Mr. Karim had symptoms which did not get better and, in fact, some of them worsened, which "was not what one would expect with this type of injury";
there was cognitive distortion in that the plaintiff was "seeing things in the worst possible way";
"Mr. Karim sees himself as being very disabled throughout all functions of his life, family, recreational and work and... his perception of his own disabilities is a significant problem in terms of his rehabilitation";
the plaintiff's actual limitations are "slight" but they should be contrasted with his perceived limitations;
a "big problem" that has to be addressed is Mr. Karim's belief that "he has to be pain free [in relation to his chronic pain condition] before he can do anything else"; and
although the plaintiff has been non-compliant with respect to some aspects of the recommended treatment, this is due to the cognitive difficulties associated with the chronic pain.
D. Dr. Paramonoff
57  The plaintiff was assessed by the physiatrist Dr. Paramonoff in April 2012. Her opinions include the following:
physical injuries including those noted above;
affective symptoms and psychological issues;
given the plaintiff's pain presentation at the time of the assessment, he would not be able to tolerate his job duties;
based on the musculoskeletal injuries sustained in the Accident, Mr. Karim should not be permanently disabled from his job duties; and
she identified other factors playing a role in the plaintiff's symptomology and recommended that he be referred to psychiatry and/or a psychologist for counselling.
E. Dr. Nader and Dr. Lau
58  The plaintiff was assessed by the psychologist Dr. Rami Nader in September 2012. At this time, Mr. Karim was returning to his employment at Abercorn. In his report, dated September 24, 2012, Dr. Nader diagnosed major depressive disorder and pain disorder associated with both psychological factors and a general medical condition. These were causally related to the Accident. The symptoms included inability to work and uncertainty about his vocational future, physical deconditioning, increase stress leading to exacerbations in his stuttering, cognitive difficulties, and conflict with his fiancé.
59  It was Dr. Nader's opinion that Mr. Karim should receive at least 16 sessions of cognitive behavioural therapy. It was also his view that the prognosis for improvement was "reasonably good".
60  On Dr. Nader's recommendation, the plaintiff attended counselling with Dr. Mark Lau.
61  Mr. Karim began treatment with Dr. Lau on October 17, 2012. His first visit recorded his complaints with respect to his pain and the stresses related to his relationship with his fiancé. After one treatment, he expressed great improvement with respect to attitude and pain. On the third visit, Mr. Karim advised Dr. Lau that "he needed a second job to feel better" and that "if he still felt depressed after getting a second job he would contact [Dr. Nader] to continue therapy". He indicated he already knew all about cognitive behavioural therapy because he had been taught the basic principles during his program at Columbia.
62  Mr. Karim did not contact Dr. Lau for further treatment. During his cross-examination, Dr. Gouws agreed that three visits with Dr. Lau was poor compliance on the plaintiff's part.
F. Dr. Riar and Dr. Miller
63  Dr. Kulwant Riar is a psychiatrist who assessed the plaintiff in October 2014. He prepared a report dated November 4, 2014. He also authored a second report which commented on the report of Dr. Robert Miller, a psychiatrist who assessed the plaintiff on behalf of the defendants. Dr. Riar testified at the trial.
64  Dr. Riar's diagnosis was that the plaintiff suffers from a somatic symptom disorder, major depression, and anxiety disorder. These were all causally related to the Accident. He understood that the plaintiff had lost his employment due to his inability to do what was required of him. This led to a sense of loss of control and feelings of helplessness which were then transformed into symptoms of major depression and anxiety. He stated that the ending of his engagement was probably indirectly related to the psychological consequences of the Accident.
65  Dr. Riar was of the view that his and Dr. Miller's opinions were very similar. The plaintiff would, with assistance, achieve remission of his psychiatric symptoms but there was interplay between pain and depression. He could not say if future exacerbations of pain would result in a relapse of the depressive symptoms.
66  On cross-examination, he stated that three to four sessions of counselling did not constitute sufficient treatment. He was also of the view that anti-depressants should be prescribed and this had not yet occurred. It would take approximately one month to see their effect.
67  Dr. Miller assessed the plaintiff on October 23, 2014. In his report, dated November 7, 2014, he diagnosed Mr. Karim as having a major depressive disorder with symptoms of chronic pain and a somatic symptom disorder.
68  He was of the opinion that the termination of the plaintiff's relationship with Ms. Azimi may be indirectly attributable to the Accident. He opined Mr. Karim would likely not have suffered from depressive symptoms when the relationship ended but for the Accident.
69  It was Dr. Miller's view that Mr. Karim's prognosis was dependent on his ability to maintain employment despite his limitations of physical function. It was likely that he would continue to struggle to maintain employment. Even with treatment, the plaintiff would probably continue to suffer from exacerbations of his depressive mood symptoms.
G. Wendy Duke
70  Ms. Duke is an expert in speech pathology and speech conditions such as stuttering. She treated the plaintiff both before and after the Accident.
71  She stated that Mr. Karim, as a result of the treatments he had received, had developed a "fragile" hold on fluency prior to the Accident.
72  Ms. Duke testified that, prior to the Accident, the plaintiff, due to his motivation, was a good candidate for her program. She testified the goal was not to eliminate the stutter since there is no cure, but rather to increase fluency in speech.
73  She stated she used cognitive behaviour techniques in her treatment and described this as "the power of positive thinking". It was her opinion that, but for the Accident, Mr. Karim would have maintained control over his speech and not regressed to the extent he did.
H. Derek Nordin
74  Mr. Nordin is a vocational consultant who assessed the plaintiff on September 19, 2013. At the time Mr. Karim was employed at Sunrise.
75  Mr. Nordin's opinions in his report, dated October 17, 2013, included:
Mr. Karim was not a good candidate for formal post-secondary retraining;
he was a "realistic" individual with a strong interest in areas including construction and repair activities;
absent the Accident, the plaintiff could have continued with his established pre-injury pattern of employment for the foreseeable future;
based on what had been reported to him, Mr. Karim is no longer capable of renovation, construction, and camera operator work;
he had considered alternative employment possibilities for the plaintiff, but had been unable to identify any he would be suited for. He was of the view that Mr. Karim's employment at Sunrise was tenuous at best; and
his expectation of the plaintiff's future employment prospects was that:
[H]e will have a series of jobs which he will be able to obtain relying on his maintenance background but which he will struggle to maintain because of his inability to meet the physical demands of the job. Ultimately, if this pattern develops, he will eventually find it difficult to even market himself to these types of jobs...
as he presented at our office (including results of his testing), I am concerned about Mr. Karim's ability to successfully re[-]establish himself in the workforce over the long term (at least at the level he was prior to being injured).
[Emphasis in the original.]
IV: THE PARTIES' POSITIONS 
 A: The Plaintiff 
76  The plaintiff's position is that he sustained significant injuries to his neck and back which have not resolved to any real degree over time. He is now in a position of chronic pain. In addition, the stresses associated with these injuries have resulted in the aggravation of a significant stuttering condition which was largely under control at the time of the Accident.
77  He submits that these injuries have had a profound effect on his personal and vocational life. He has done his best to cope with the situation in which he finds himself. Specifically, he has been diligent in attempting to find work when he was terminated from employment due to his injuries. He says the effects of his injuries will negatively affect his future vocational capabilities.
78  The plaintiff submits that his claim for damages for income loss to the date of the Accident and loss of earning capacity relating to future employment should be based on an annual salary of <damage type = "other">$40,600</damage> per year, being the approximate amount earned at Abercorn and Sandman after factoring in provincial and federal income taxes.
79  Mr. Karim claims the following damages:
 B: The Defendants 
80  The defendants submit that the plaintiff sustained soft-tissue injuries to his neck and back which resolved within approximately one year of the Accident. They say that any ongoing disability past that point in time is not their responsibility.
81  The defendants say that the plaintiff's complaints worsened over time which, as Dr. Gouws acknowledged on cross-examination, is contrary to the usual progress of musculoskeletal injuries. They argue that there is no objective evidence of injury, all complaints of pain being subjective.
82  They point to portions of the medical and expert evidence which they argue is to the effect that Mr. Karim has not availed himself of opportunities to mitigate his damages, specifically speech and psychological counselling. They also submit that, from a physical perspective, the plaintiff is not as functionally disabled as he says; in other words, his perception of his ongoing pain is just that, a perception.
83  The defendants base their argument on several points of evidence, including Mr. Karim's work experience with the public prior to the treatment of his stutter in 2009, that the regression of his stuttering symptomology is temporary, and that his complaints of physical limitations are inconsistent.
84  A key point from the defendants' perspective is the medical and expert evidence which is to the effect that it is not the plaintiff's actual physical limitations that affect his ability to function, but rather his perception that he must be pain free before he can effectively perform his day-to-day activities. They submit it is unreasonable for the plaintiff to expect that they should pay the significant damages claimed on this perception rather than what is the reality.
85  The defendants say that with the appropriate psychological, speech, and pain clinic treatments which they are prepared to fund, a reasonable range of damages is as follows:
V: CREDIBILITY 
86  As is common in these types of cases, the medical and expert evidence in this proceeding is based to a significant degree on the history provided to the various professionals by Mr. Karim and his account with respect to his physical and speech condition prior to the Accident and its effects thereafter.
87  In this case, there are little, if any, objective findings. In light of this, it is necessary to assess Mr. Karim's credibility.
88  As Madam Justice Dillon noted in Bradshaw v. Stenner,  at para. 186, aff'd :
[186] Credibility involves an assessment of the trustworthiness of a witness' testimony based upon the veracity or sincerity of a witness and the accuracy of the evidence that the witness provides (Raymond v. Bosanquet (Township) ,  (S.C.C.)). The art of assessment involves examination of various factors such as the ability and opportunity to observe events, the firmness of his memory, the ability to resist the influence of interest to modify his recollection, whether the witness' evidence harmonizes with independent evidence that has been accepted, whether the witness changes his testimony during direct and cross-examination, whether the witness' testimony seems unreasonable, impossible, or unlikely, whether a witness has a motive to lie, and the demeanour of a witness generally (Wallace v. Davis  (Ont. H.C.); Faryna v. Chorny (1951),  (B.C.C.A.) [Faryna]; R. v. S. (R.D.),  (S.C.C.) at para.128). Ultimately, the validity of the evidence depends on whether the evidence is consistent with the probabilities affecting the case as a whole and shown to be in existence at the time (Faryna at para. 356).
89  In addition, the following principles should be taken into account by the trier of fact:
no one can expect compensation in the absence of convincing evidence that complaints of pain are true reflections of a continuing injury: Price v. Kostryba  at 399 (S.C.);
every injured person has a different understanding of his or her own complaints and injuries and it falls to judges to translate injuries to damages: Price at 397;
where there is little or no objective evidence of continuing injury and where complaints of pain persist for long periods extending beyond the expected resolution, the court should be exceedingly careful to assess assertions in light of the surrounding circumstances including the medical evidence: Price at 399; Tai v. De Busscher,  at para. 41;
it is the doctor's function to take the patient's complaints at face value and offer an opinion based on them and it is for the court to assess credibility. If there is a medical or other reason for the doctor to suspect the plaintiff's complaints are not genuine, are inconsistent with the clinical picture or are inconsistent with the known course of such an injury, the court must be told of that. But it is not the doctor's job to conduct an investigation beyond the confines of the examining room: Edmondson v. Payer,  at para. 77, aff'd ; and
in the absence of objective signs of injury, the court's reliance on the medical profession must proceed from the facts it finds, and must seek congruence between those facts and the advice offered by the medical witnesses as to the possible medical consequences and the potential duration of the injuries: Fan (Guardian ad litem of) v. Chana,  at para. 73, aff'd .
See also Buttar v. Brennan,  at paras. 23-25.
90  Where injuries contain a psychological component -- which is often the case in situations of chronic pain -- the principles set out in Maslen v. Rubinstein  at 133-135 (C.A.), should also be considered. These will be dealt with below in the analysis of the causation of a psychological injury.
91  In making the findings of fact set out below, I have taken the following into account:
Mr. Karim generally testified in an honest and forthright manner and I find this was also his intention when providing his personal history to the various physicians and experts who assessed him from time to time;
there were, however, some instances of embellishment that will be described in more detail below; and
Mr. Karim's perceptions of his pain and disability should be contrasted with whether he has established that his level of functioning is in reality as dire as he considers it to be and whether he has the ability to overcome them with the application of his own inherent resources or willpower.
VI. CAUSATION
A. Principles of Causation
92  A defendant is liable for any injuries caused or contributed to by his or her negligence. If the defendants' conduct is found to be a cause of the injury, the presence of other non-tortious contributing causes does not reduce the extent of the defendants' liability. However, if the defendant did not cause an injury, the defendant will not be liable for any losses or damages flowing from that injury: Brewster v. Li,  at para. 78; Blackwater v. Plint,  at para. 78.
93  In cases of negligence, the law requires a causal link between an act or omission and the harm suffered by the plaintiff. The onus is on the plaintiff to prove that: (i) the defendant was the "cause in fact" of the harm suffered, and (ii) that "but for" the defendant's wrongful act, the plaintiff's loss would not have occurred. This second component is a remoteness analysis. See Brewster at para. 77; Hussack v. Chilliwack School District No. 33,  at para. 54.
94  The primary test for causation in Canada is the "but-for" test: Resurfice Corp. v. Hanke,  at paras. 21-22; Clements (Litigation Guardian of) v. Clements,  at para. 8. To determine whether the defendant caused an injury, the trier of fact asks if the injury would have resulted but for the action of the defendant. Athey v. Leonati,  at 466. If a substantial connection is made, the defendant is liable to the plaintiff for the whole of the losses flowing from the injury.
95  The losses that flow from an injury are those that the plaintiff proves would not have occurred but for the injury (caused by the defendant): Brewster at para. 82; Blackwater at para. 78.
96  In special circumstances, the "but for" test proves unworkable, and the law has applied a "material contribution" test. Application of the "material contribution" test has two requirements: (i) for reasons outside of the plaintiff's control it is impossible to prove that the negligence caused the injury using the "but-for" test, and (ii) the defendant breached a duty of care owed the plaintiff, thereby exposing the plaintiff to an unreasonable risk of injury, and the injury falls within the ambit of the risk created: Resurfice Corp. at paras. 24-28.
97  In these circumstances, a "but for" analysis is appropriate. As noted above, the plaintiff must establish causation for both injury and loss: Brewster at para. 78. In Blackwater v. Plint,  at para. 364, Chief Justice Brenner, as he then was, described the difference between "injury" and "loss" as:
"injury" refers to the initial physical or mental impairment of the plaintiff's person as a result of the [defendant's act], while "loss" refers to the pecuniary or non-pecuniary consequences of that impairment.
98  In proving both an injury and loss, the plaintiff must establish the existence of liability and then the extent of that liability: Brewster at para. 80.
99  It is a basic principle of tort law that the plaintiff must be placed in the position he or she would have been in had the defendant's tortious act not occurred: Athey at 466; Blackwater (SCC) at para. 81. The thin skull rule provides that a defendant must take his or her victim as they find them, even if the plaintiff's injuries are more severe than they would be for a normal person. However, the crumbling skull rule provides that the defendant need not compensate the plaintiff for any debilitating effects of a pre-existing condition which the plaintiff would have experienced whether or not injury was sustained by the defendant's tortious act. See Athey at 473.
100  The name "crumbling skull" doctrine can be misleading and it should not be assumed to contrast manifest and disabling conditions with latent conditions triggered by the tort: T.W.N.A. v. Canada (Ministry of Indian Affairs) (sub nom A. (T.W.N.) v. Clarke),  at para. 26. In T.W.N.A., Smith J.A. for the Court of Appeal observed that both latent and active pre-existing conditions must be considered in assessing the plaintiff's original position and the difference between the two conditions only arises in the assessment of damages: paras. 29-30. See also York v. Johnston .
101  Unrelated intervening events must be considered in the same manner as pre-existing conditions: T.W.N.A. at para. 36.
B. Psychological Injury
102  The principles to be applied in assessing claims of psychological injury are set out in Maslen at 133-135 and summarized in Yoshikawa v. Yu,  at 325-326 (C.A.). They are:
the pain, discomfort, or weakness must be genuine;
the psychological problems must have their cause in the defendant's wrongful act and not be rooted in desires for sympathy or compensation or be such that the plaintiff could be expected to overcome them through his or her inherent resources;
the psychological problems will be found to be subjective or internal if their existence or continuation stems from the plaintiff's desire for their existence or continuation;
causation is not established unless the court can say whether the plaintiff really desired to be free of the psychological problems;
identification of the symptoms as "chronic benign pain syndrome" does not resolve the questions of legal liability or the question of assessment of damages;
it is unlikely expert opinion can resolve the ultimate questions on which these cases turn;
psychological problems will attract damages where the psychological mechanism is beyond the plaintiff's power to control and was set in motion by the defendant's wrongful act; and
evidence of psychological problems must be of a "convincing nature" but the plaintiff's own evidence, if consistent with the surrounding circumstances, may suffice for the purpose.
This list is not intended to be exhaustive: Yoshikawa at 326.
103  When determining whether or not a psychological injury has occurred, some expert medical evidence is necessary. The trier of fact should not rely only on a plaintiff's own perception of disability: D.E. v. Unum Life Insurance Co. of America,  at para. 86.
104  Consideration should also be given to whether the plaintiff's pre-existing condition was caused by significant tortious, as opposed to non-tortious, factors. If the plaintiff's original position consisted of anxiety, depression, and stress related to a prior tortious cause then that must be taken into account.
105  To calculate damages owing where psychological injury is found, the Court of Appeal in Perdomo-Flores v. Gurney  at 3 (C.A.) held:
If the plaintiff would never have suffered the problems if the accident had not occurred, or if he or she would have suffered some problems if the accident had not occurred but those problems would have been less irksome, or would have been deferred, then the plaintiff is entitled to recover damages either measured by the entire loss caused by the psychological problems if they would not have occurred at all but for the accident, or measured by the increase in the psychological problems where some psychological problems would have occurred in any event but an increase in the psychological difficulties experienced by the plaintiff, either in intensity or in time of occurrence, was brought about by the accident.
106  Any question of mitigation can only arise after causation has been established. If it is established that the psychological injury was caused by the unlawful conduct of the defendant and mitigation issues are raised, the court must decide whether the defendant has established that by following advice which the plaintiff received or ought to have obtained, the plaintiff could have overcome the problem, or could in the future overcome it: Maslen at 135.
VII: DUTY TO MITIGATE 
107  Prior to setting out my findings of fact and assessing the plaintiff's damages, I will deal with the defendants' submissions that the plaintiff has failed to mitigate his damages.
108  The defendants submit that the plaintiff failed to seek appropriate treatment in a timely fashion, in particular psychological counselling including cognitive behavioral therapy.
109  A plaintiff has an obligation to take all reasonable measures to reduce his or her loss, including undergoing treatment to alleviate or cure injuries: Danicek v. Alexander Holburn Beaudin & Lang,  at para. 234.
110  Once the plaintiff has proven the defendant's liability for his or her injuries, the defendant must prove that the plaintiff acted unreasonably and that reasonable conduct would have reduced or eliminated the loss. Whether the plaintiff acted reasonably is a factual question and it involves a consideration of all of the circumstances: Gilbert v. Bottle,  at para. 202.
111  The three elements to be proven by the defendants were set out in Frers v. De Moulin,  at para. 217:
there were steps that the plaintiff could have taken that might have avoided or reduced the loss;
those steps were reasonable; and
the amount by which those steps would have avoided or reduced the loss.
See also Chiu (Guardian ad litem of) v. Chiu,  at para. 57.
112  I find that the defendants have not established that the plaintiff failed to mitigate his damages. While it is true that Mr. Karim stopped attending counselling sessions with Mr. Lau in the fall of 2012, that was in the context of his returning to work which he, understandably, believed to be a positive development. In addition, he did follow recommendations insofar as resuming physical exercise was concerned. He also did receive some form of counselling while taking refresher courses at Columbia.
113  It may well be that commencing a comprehensive rehabilitation plan within a year or so of the Accident would have achieved greater success in assisting the plaintiff's perception of his pain and its impact on his functioning. I will comment further on such a plan below when I consider the cost of future care.
114  However, insofar as mitigation is concerned, the defendants have not established that the plaintiff can be faulted in the manner in which he attempted to deal with his pain post-Accident.
VIII: FINDINGS OF FACT AND CONCLUSIONS ON THE EVIDENCE 
115  When I apply the principles to which I have referred to the evidence in this case, I make the following findings of fact and reach certain conclusions:
prior to the Accident, Mr. Karim was a hard-working and industrious man who had overcome significant obstacles in his past. He was satisfied with his life both personally and professionally;
Mr. Karim's "original position" included a significant difficulty with stuttering which, although considerably improved from what it had been in the past, was in a fragile or vulnerable state. Had the Accident not occurred, regression was likely were he faced with stressful conditions either in his personal or vocational life;
although I found the plaintiff generally to be credible, he has embellished certain events. For example, he advised Dr. Nader that the defendants' vehicle was travelling at approximately 80 kph when it struck him. Common sense leads to the conclusion that his vehicle would not have been drivable after the Accident had this been the case and that emergency vehicles would have attended the Accident scene, neither of which occurred. There are also examples of embellishment in his work and educational history;
the plaintiff has a tendency to see things in their worst light. Dr. Gouws characterized this as "pain catastrophization". This has resulted in the perception that he is much more disabled from a pain and functioning perspective than he is in reality;
the plaintiff sustained moderate to moderately-severe soft tissue injuries in the Accident. He was essentially totally incapacitated from a physical perspective for a period of approximately one year and at intermittent times thereafter. As such, his condition, which includes psychological factors, does satisfy the criteria for "chronic pain" being pain that persists for more than six months. The psychological factors have had a significant negative effect on his ability to recover;
despite the plaintiff's presentation and the history he has provided to the various professionals who have assessed him, he is capable of much more than what he perceives. I accept Dr. Gouws evidence in cross-examination to that effect;
a component of the plaintiff's perception of his inability to function may be his psychological makeup. He has, however, demonstrated the ability to overcome disability through his own resources or willpower. An example is his ability to control his stuttering to which I have referred above;
with appropriate professional assistance including a further intensive course at Columbia together with a 16 session cognitive behavioural therapy program as recommended by Dr. Riar, Mr. Karim will largely return to his level of personal and professional functioning experienced prior to the Accident; and
in that regard, I accept Dr. Gouws' and Dr. Paramonoff's opinions which identified "catastrophization" and "confounding factors" as the main limitation to Mr. Karim's recovery. This is the basis for their recommendation that he obtain psychological assistance.
IX: ASSESSMENT OF DAMAGES 
 A: Introduction 
116  The purpose of awarding damages in an action for tort is to compensate the injured party as completely as possible for the loss suffered as a result of the negligent action or inaction of the defendant.
117  Compensation is intended to return the plaintiff to his or her original position and there is no obligation on the defendant to put the plaintiff in a better condition than he or she was in: Dhaliwal v. Tomelden,  at para. 148; Athey at 473-474.
118  A pre-existing condition is part of the plaintiff's original position: T.W.N.A. at para. 28. Pre-existing weaknesses inherent in a plaintiff are contingencies that should be accounted for in the assessment of damages. It is not necessary that contingencies be proven to a certainty but rather that they are given weight according to their relative likelihood: T.W.N.A. at para. 48.
119  It is within this context of legal principles and the findings of fact and conclusions on the evidence that I have made above that the plaintiff's damages should be assessed.
 B: Non-pecuniary Damages 
120  Non-pecuniary damages are awarded to compensate the plaintiff for pain, suffering, loss of enjoyment of life, and loss of amenities. The compensation awarded should be fair to all parties and fairness is measured against awards made in comparable cases. Such cases, though helpful, serve only as a rough guide as each case depends on its own unique facts: Trites v. Penner,  at paras. 188-189.
121  The framework for the assessment of non-pecuniary damages was outlined by the Court of Appeal in Stapley v. Hejslet, :
[46] The inexhaustive list of common factors cited in Boyd [v. Harris, ] that influence an award of non-pecuniary damages includes:
age of the plaintiff;
nature of the injury;
severity and duration of pain;
disability;
emotional suffering; and
loss or impairment of life;
I would add the following factors, although they may arguably be subsumed in the above list:
impairment of family, marital and social relationships;
impairment of physical and mental abilities;
loss of lifestyle; and
the plaintiff's stoicism (as a factor that should not, generally speaking, penalize the plaintiff): Giang v. Clayton, .
122  The assessment of non-pecuniary damages is necessarily influenced by the individual plaintiff's personal experiences in dealing with his or her injuries and their consequences and ability to articulate that: Dilello v. Montgomery,  at para. 25.
123  Further, as mentioned above, care should be taken where there is little objective evidence of continuing injury and when complaints persist well-beyond the usual recovery period: Price at 399.
See Jackson v. Jeffries,  at paras. 77-79; Mirsaeidi v. Coleman,  at paras. 60-62; Hodgson v. Saeed,  at paras. 99-101.
124  The plaintiff relies on Morena v. Dhillon, , S.R. v. Trasolini, , Ashcroft v. Dhaliwal, , and Eccleston v. Dresen, , as the basis for his submission that the range for non-pecuniary damages in this case is <damage type = "other">$110,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$130,000</damage>. These cases involve moderate to severe soft tissue injuries with various degrees of physical and psychological symptoms. All involved female individuals older than Mr. Karim with ages ranging from 43-54.
125  In submitting that the appropriate range under this head of damages should be in the range of <damage type = "other">$75,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$90,000</damage>, the defendants rely on Andrusko v. Alexander, , Bearpark v. Lakhanpal, , Jackson v. Jeffries, , and Samson v. Aubin, . The plaintiffs in these cases were men between the ages of 25-31 with partial to full high school education and physical work experience.
126  Based on my findings of fact, I am satisfied that Mr. Karim, who was 25 years old at the time of the accident, suffered moderate to moderately-severe soft tissue injuries at the time of the accident which resulted in physical and psychological consequences. The stress of these injuries also aggravated the significant stuttering condition which existed prior to the Accident. I also find that the consequences of the Accident were instrumental in the termination of his relationship with Ms. Azimi which resulted in an increase in his stress and greatly affected his quality of life for a period of time.
127  I have also found that with an appropriate course of treatment both physical and psychological that Mr. Karim should largely return to his pre-Accident level of functioning. Thereafter, there will still, in my view, be some occasions in the future when the consequences of the Accident will affect the plaintiff both professionally and personally.
128  I conclude that the authorities referred to by the defendants in particular Andrusko resemble more closely the plaintiff's circumstances. But that award of <damage type = "other">$80,000</damage>, in my view, should be increased to reflect the contribution that the Accident had on the plaintiff's relationship with Ms. Azimi. The award should also reflect that although I have concluded that the plaintiff does have the ability to overcome his negative perceptions of how the Accident has affected his life this will take some real effort on his part.
129  I award the plaintiff <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$100,000</damage> under this heading.
C: Past Income Loss Including Past Loss of Earning Capacity
130  Compensation for past loss of earning capacity is based on what the plaintiff would have, not could have, earned but for the injury that was sustained: Rowe v. Bobell Express Ltd.,  at para. 25; M.B. v. British Columbia,  at para. 27.
131  In Rowe, the Court of Appeal explained at paras. 30-31:
. . . [A] claim for what is often described as "past loss of income" is actually a claim for loss of earning capacity; that is, a claim for the loss of the value of the work that the injured plaintiff would have performed but was unable to perform because of the injury.
Evidence of this value may take many forms. As was said by Kenneth D. Cooper-Stephenson in Personal Injury Damages in Canada, 2nd ed. (Scarborough, Ont.: Carswell, 1996) at 205-06,
... The essence of the task under this head of damages is to award compensation for any pecuniary loss which will result from an inability to work. "Loss of the value of work" is the substance of the claim - loss of the value of any work the plaintiff would have done but for the accident but now will be unable to do. The loss framed in this way may be measured in different ways. Sometimes it will be measured by reference to the actual earnings the plaintiff would have received; sometimes by a replacement cost evaluation of tasks which the plaintiff will now be unable to perform; sometimes by an assessment of reduced company profits; and sometimes by the amount of secondary income lost, such as shared family income.
[Underlining added in Rowe; other emphasis in original.]
See also Ibbitson v. Cooper,  at para. 19.
132  Pursuant to s. 98 of the Insurance (Vehicle) Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 231, a plaintiff is entitled to recover damages only for his or her past net income loss. This means that in the ordinary course, the court must deduct the amount of income tax payable from lost gross earnings: Hudniuk v. Warkentin, .
133  The burden of proof of actual past events is a balance of probabilities. An assessment of loss of both past and future earning capacity involves consideration of hypothetical events. The plaintiff is not required to prove these hypothetical events on a balance of probabilities. The future or hypothetical possibility will be taken into consideration as long as it is a real and substantial possibility and not mere speculation: Athey at 470.
134  The plaintiff's employment earnings at Abercorn were <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage> per year. Although he did earn a higher income at Sunrise and Sandman, his position is that but for the Accident he would have continued to work at Abercorn. Ms. Christiane Clark authored an economist's report on behalf of the plaintiff. Based on this annual salary, she calculated the plaintiff's loss of earnings to trial at the gross amount of <damage type = "other">$56,000</damage> including benefits. The net amount of earnings and benefits is approximately <damage type = "other">$40,600</damage> (taking into account the slightly higher income earned at Sunrise) assessed according to the approach set out in Lines v. W & D Logging Co. Ltd. (sub nom Lines v. Gordon), , and Laxdall v. Robbins, .
135  The plaintiff also seeks an award for the alleged loss of the value of his services to his family in performing renovations to their homes and apartments since the Accident. He says that there is a proven history of such benefits such as when he obtained reduced rent with his former mother-in-law.
136  He also submits that his camera and editing work for his aunt helped her purchase a house in Iraq and that the renovation work to Ms. Azimi's family home was also likely to result in a financial benefit to him. He says that this aspect of the claim cannot be assessed with a calculation and he seeks the "modest" amount of <damage type = "other">$15,000</damage> for his past loss of services to his family and resulting value to him.
137  The defendants' position is that the plaintiff was off work from the date of the Accident to Sept 1, 2012. His loss for that period is documented by Abercorn as <damage type = "other">$37,079.04</damage>. The defendants say that is the entirety of the plaintiff's loss. Any further loss flows from his failure to follow through with the appropriate treatment.
138  I have not accepted the defendants' argument pertaining to mitigation. Accordingly the past loss of income from employment is <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">$40,600</damage>.
139  The issue then becomes whether the plaintiff has established, in accordance with the principles in Rowe, the basis for an additional award.
140  I have concluded that he has but only to a very limited extent. There is evidence from both the plaintiff and Mr. Sophi of some extra renovation work the plaintiff did on evenings and weekends prior to the Accident and how this was affected by the injuries he sustained. But there is a dearth of evidence as to what was earned. I award the plaintiff a nominal <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">$1,000</damage> for this loss.
141  While there was evidence regarding reduced rent when the plaintiff lived in an apartment owned by his former mother in law, the evidence that there was a likely monetary value to services provided to Ms. Azimi's family is entirely speculative. The vague evidence regarding the camera editing work and the purchase of property in Iraq is also insufficient to establish a real and substantial possibility of a loss.
142  Accordingly, I award a total of <damage type = "past wage loss">$41,600</damage> under this heading.
 D: Loss of Future Earning Capacity 
143  As Mr. Justice Greyell set out in Simmavong v. Haddock, :
[95] A claim for loss of future earning capacity raises two key questions:
has the plaintiff's earning capacity been impaired by his or her injuries; and, if so,
what compensation should be awarded for the resulting financial harm that will accrue over time?
144  Assessing damages is a matter of judgment: Rosvold v. Dunlop,  at para. 18.
145  In order to put the plaintiff back in his or her original position, it is for the court to compare the "likely future of the plaintiff if the accident had not happened and the plaintiff's likely future after the accident has happened": Rosvold at para. 11; Gregory v. Insurance Corporation of British Columbia,  at para. 32; Ryder (Guardian ad litem of) v. Jubbal (sub nom Ryder v. Paquette),  at para. 8.
146  The applicable principles for assessing loss of future earning capacity are as follows:
the standard of proof is simple probability and events are weighted according to their relative likelihood: Athey at 470;
a plaintiff is entitled to real and substantial possibilities of loss as quantified by estimating the chance of the loss occurring: Athey at 470; Steenblok v. Funk  at 135 (C.A.);
the valuation of the loss of earning capacity may compare what the plaintiff probably would have earned but for the accident against what he or she will probably earn in his or her injured condition: Milina v. Bartsch  at 93 (S.C.), aff'd  (C.A.);
the overall fairness and reasonableness of the award must be considered: Rosvold at para. 11;
the role of the court is to assess losses based on the evidence, not to calculate them mathematically: Brown v. Golaiy ; Pallos v. Insurance Corp. of British Columbia ; Pett v. Pett, ; and
allowances must be made for the contingency that the assumptions upon which the award is based may prove to be wrong: Milina at 79.
147  While proof of a substantial possibility is not a heavy onus, it is an onus that must be met for an award of damages under this heading to be justified: Kim v. Morier (sub nom Kim v. Tigounov),  at para. 7. This translates into a realistic possibility of economic consequences: Kim at para. 8.
148  There are two possible approaches to assessing loss of future earning capacity: (i) the earning approach (Pallos), or (ii) the capital asset approach (Brown). Both approaches are correct and their appropriateness in the circumstances depends on whether the loss can be quantified in a measurable way: Perren v. Lalari, .
149  The earnings approach involves a form of math-oriented methodology such as (i) postulating a minimum annual income loss for the plaintiff's remaining years of work, multiplying the annual projected loss by the number of remaining years and calculating a present value, or (ii) awarding the plaintiff's entire annual income for a year or two: Pallos at 271; Gilbert at para. 233.
150  The capital asset approach is employed when future loss cannot be measured in a pecuniary way. Finch J., as he then was, described the factors to consider in Brown at 356:
The plaintiff has been rendered less capable overall from earning income from all types of employment;
the plaintiff is less marketable or attractive as an employee to potential employers;
the plaintiff has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities which might otherwise have been open to him, had he not been injured; and
The plaintiff is less valuable to himself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market.
See also Perren at para. 32; Gilbert at para. 233.
151  Where an earnings approach is the most appropriate method of assessing an award under loss of future earning capacity but it does not fully encompass the realities of the situation, it is correct to consider all of the evidence and adjust the award for further negative contingencies: Westbroek v. Brizuela,  at paras. 64-66.
152  Ms. Clarke's income loss multiplier is <damage type = "other">$26,916</damage> per <damage type = "other">$1000</damage> to age 65 taking labour market contingencies into account.
153  The plaintiff seeks an award of <damage type = "other">$800,000</damage> under this head of damages based on certain factors, including:
the medical evidence including that of Dr. Eichhorst and Dr. Gouws regarding the plaintiff's disabilities and the vocational restrictions on the physical nature of work he can perform in the future;
Mr. Nordin's opinion that he could not identify suitable future employment options and that the plaintiff will struggle to keep maintenance positions until the point is reached that he will no longer find a position in this industry;
the plaintiff's pre-Accident character was one of being a hard worker who took pride and identified with his work. It will be difficult for him to lower his perceptions of himself and take a lighter duty job. He will struggle to maintain employment in the maintenance field and this will affect his ability to seek replacement employment; and
using the "risks only" model set out in Ms. Clarke's report and on the assumption that the plaintiff will continue to work as a building maintenance worker to the end of 2020 but will earn about 30% less due to anticipated future failures in his employment and on the further assumption that he would then commence working in some as yet unspecified occupation that better suits his physical capabilities from 2012 to age 67, then this aspect of his loss should be assessed at approximately <damage type = "other">$600,000</damage>.
154  The plaintiff also seeks an award of <damage type = "other">$200,000</damage> representing the loss in value to himself in relation to renovating properties for himself and his family in the future.
155  The defendants' position is that the plaintiff has not satisfied the threshold criteria for an award under this heading. In particular, they argue the plaintiff's perception of what constitutes a loss is insufficient.
156  I have concluded that, while the plaintiff has established a loss of future earning capacity, I do not accept the methodology outlined at para 153 above.
157  My findings of fact include that, with the rehabilitation measures to which I have referred in place, the plaintiff will largely return to his pre-Accident level of functioning.
158  By "largely" I mean that Mr. Karim will, from time to time in the future, have some sporadic ongoing symptoms from the physical and psychological effects of what was a situation of chronic pain. But those symptoms will be modest once his perception of pain and disability lessen considerably following the treatment regime.
159  Taking into account the timeframe it will take for the treatment to occur, including a residential pain clinic and the substantial possibility of infrequent absences from the work force during his working life, I award the plaintiff <damage type = "future wage loss">$100,000</damage> under this head of damages. I have utilized the earnings approach yet given consideration to all the evidence to award what I consider to be fair under this heading to both the plaintiff and the defendants. Roughly speaking, <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage> is equivalent to slightly more than two years' wages at <damage type = "other">$40,000</damage> per year over the plaintiff's working life. This would take into account the time off work required to engage in the treatment plan as well as any short absences from work that may occur from time to time in the future.
160  I make no award for the alleged loss in performing home renovations. Any loss following completion of the treatment plan is, in my view, entirely speculative.
 E: Cost of Future Care 
161  A plaintiff is entitled to compensation for the cost of future care based on what is reasonably necessary to restore him or her to his or her original position, as far as that is possible. Where full restoration cannot be achieved, the court must strive to assure full compensation through the provision of adequate future care.
162  The purpose of an award for future cost of care is "to compensate for a financial loss reasonably incurred to sustain or promote the mental and/or physical health of an injured plaintiff": Erickson v. Sibble,  at para. 316. The basis for such an award is what is medically justified and reasonable based on the evidence: Milina at 84; Spehar (Guardian ad litem of) v. Beazley,  at para. 55.
163  In Kuskis v. Tin,  at paras. 163-164, Madam Justice Dickson summarized the principles to consider in relation to a claim for cost of future care:
[163] An award for the cost of future care is notional and imprecise in nature: Strachan (Guardian ad litem of) v. Reynolds, . The court must consider evidence regarding what care is likely in the injured person's best interest and calculate its present cost, with appropriate adjustment for contingencies in all of the circumstances of the case: Courdin v. Meyers, .
[164] In making an award for future care costs the court must take into account both what is medically required and what expenses the plaintiff will likely incur. Items and services that the plaintiff is unlikely to use in the future cannot be justified as reasonably necessary aspects of the cost of future care: Izony v. Weidlich, .
164  The extent to which, if at all, a future care costs award should be adjusted for contingencies depends on the specific care needs of the plaintiff. In some cases, negative contingencies are offset by positive contingencies and, therefore, a contingency adjustment is not required. In other cases, however, the award is reduced based on the prospect of improvement in the plaintiff's condition or increased based on the prospect that additional care will be required. Each case falls to be determined on its particular facts. See Gilbert at para. 253.
165  An assessment of damages for cost of future care is not a precise accounting exercise: Krangle (Guardian ad litem of) v. Brisco,  at para. 21.
166  Considering these principles, I make the following award:
<damage type = "sub-future care">$10,000</damage>, being the amount agreed upon by the parties as representing the reasonable cost for a residential multi-disciplinary pain clinic;
<damage type = "sub-future care">$2,960</damage>, representing 16 cognitive behavioural therapy sessions at <damage type = "other">$185</damage> per session; and
<damage type = "sub-future care">$4,000</damage>, being the approximate cost of a further intensive speech therapy course at Columbia. There will be no award for additional "refresher" sessions since the need for these pre-existed the Accident.
167  There will be no award for a kinesiologist or a gym pass. There is no evidence that the former will likely be required after the pain clinic. Furthermore, had the Accident not occurred, taking into account the physical aspects of his employment, it would have been in the plaintiff's best interests to have a gym pass in order to remain as fit as possible.
168  The total award under this head of damages is <damage type = "future care">$16,960</damage>.
 F: Special Damages 
169  The parties are in agreement on the amount of <damage type = "sub-special">$2,119.73</damage> for medical and other treatment expenses.
170  The plaintiff also seeks damages in the amount of <damage type = "other">$5800</damage> which represents out-of-pocket expenses incurred for which he is responsible in relation to the cancelled wedding ceremony with Ms. Azimi. He also claims <damage type = "other">$14,800</damage> for the loss of his ability to use the camera equipment purchased prior to the Accident.
171  It is well-established that an injured person is entitled to recover the reasonable out-of-pocket expenses he or she incurred as a result of an accident. This is grounded in the fundamental governing principle that an injured person is to be restored to the position he or she would have been in had the accident not occurred: X. v. Y.,  at para. 281; Milina at 78.
172  This compensatory principle mandates that the expenses are restorative and that they are not too remote: X v. Y at para. 282. Questions of restoration and remoteness arise in this case with respect to the costs claimed by the plaintiff associated with the cancellation of his wedding ceremony and the loss of camera equipment purchased prior to the Accident.
173  The role of remoteness is to contain liability within fair and reasonable boundaries. As discussed by Lewis N. Klar, Tort Low, 5th ed. (Toronto: Carswell, 2012) at 489-490:
The issue of remoteness asks: how far ought a negligent defendant's legal liability, and hence financial responsibility, extend? All of the harmful results of negligent conduct cannot be laid at the feet of the actor who is factually responsible for these results. The notion of proximate cause indicates that after some point, a defendant's negligent conduct will no longer be considered a legal cause of the plaintiff's injuries.
174  I have found that the anxiety and stresses that resulted from the Accident were a contributing factor to the termination of the relationship between Mr. Karim and Ms. Azimi. Ms. Azimi testified to that effect and she was not seriously challenged on this evidence.
175  However, I find that the wedding costs associated with the termination of the relationship with Ms. Azimi to be too remote at law.
176  I also make no award for the amount claimed for camera equipment. First of all, the plaintiff's evidence is that a portion of that equipment is in Iraq and the evidence on this issue is insufficient to establish a loss. Secondly, with the completion of the treatment program, the plaintiff should be able to return to this type of activity. Finally, this aspect of the claim is also too remote at law.
X: CONCLUSION 
177  I award the plaintiff the following:
Non Pecuniary Damages: <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$100,000</damage>
Past Loss of Income and Earning Capacity: <damage type = "past wage loss">$41,600</damage>
Loss of Future Earning Capacity: <damage type = "future wage loss">$ 100,000</damage>
Cost of Future Care: <damage type = "future care">$16,960</damage>
Special Damages: <damage type = "special">$2,119.73</damage>
Total <damage type = "total">$260,679.73</damage>
178  Subject to any factors pertaining to costs, which either party has leave to bring to my attention, the plaintiff is awarded his costs at Scale B.
P. ABRIOUX J.
End of Document
Kilian v. Valentin, [2012] B.C.J. No. 2009
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
C.A. Wedge J.
Heard: June 11-15 and 18-22, 2012.
Judgment: September 28, 2012.
Docket: M100134
Registry: Vancouver
[2012] B.C.J. No. 2009   |   2012 BCSC 1434
Between Jennifer Kilian, Plaintiff, and Cory Valentin and Berezay Trucking Inc. also known as M.A.A.S. Transport Inc., Defendants
(203 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Body injuries — Neck — Considerations impacting on award — Action by plaintiff for damages for injuries arising from motor vehicle accident allowed — Plaintiff made left turn, entering westbound lane and was struck by defendant attempting to change lane — She suffered neck and shoulder pain, and continued to suffer occasional neck pain, but ongoing pain had resolved — She was full-time teacher who applied for Master's program — Defendant was at fault for accident — Plaintiff was awarded $75,000 in non-pecuniary damages, $15,682 in past income loss, $70,000 in loss of earning capacity, $26,735 in cost of future care and $6172 in special damages.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — Categories of — Loss of income — Employees — For personal injuries — Considerations — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Retroactive loss of income — Special damages — Past loss of income — Employment income — Non-pecuniary loss — Action by plaintiff for damages for injuries arising from motor vehicle accident allowed — Plaintiff made left turn, entering westbound lane and was struck by defendant attempting to change lane — She suffered neck and shoulder pain, and continued to suffer occasional neck pain, but ongoing pain had resolved — She was full-time teacher who applied for Master's program — Defendant was at fault for accident — Plaintiff was awarded $75,000 in non-pecuniary damages, $15,682 in past income loss, $70,000 in loss of earning capacity, $26,735 in cost of future care and $6172 in special damages.
Tort law — Negligence — Motor vehicles — Liability of driver — Action by plaintiff for damages for injuries arising from motor vehicle accident allowed — Plaintiff made left turn, entering westbound lane and was struck by defendant attempting to change lane — She suffered neck and shoulder pain, and continued to suffer occasional neck pain, but ongoing pain had resolved — She was full-time teacher who applied for Master's program — Defendant was at fault for accident — Plaintiff was awarded $75,000 in non-pecuniary damages, $15,682 in past income loss, $70,000 in loss of earning capacity, $26,735 in cost of future care and $6172 in special damages.
Action by the plaintiff for damages for injuries arising from a motor vehicle accident. The plaintiff made a left turn, entering a westbound lane from a break in a median dividing eastbound and westbound traffic. Her car was struck by the defendant's truck as he attempted to change to the lane closest to the median. She suffered acute neck and shoulder pain as a result of the accident, and continued to suffer occasional acute neck pain, but her ongoing pain had resolved. She was 28 at the time of the accident. She obtained a temporary position as an elementary school teacher five months prior to the accident and continued in that job until receiving a full-time position two and a half years after the accident. She also had a part-time job that she had to give up because of her injuries. She completed a graduate studies program after the accident and applied for entry to a Master's program. Prior to the accident, she was physically active and had a busy social life. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 The defendant was wholly at fault for the accident. The physical evidence supported the plaintiff's assertion that she was fully in the left lane, heading westbound, and travelled at least 40 metres beyond the median before the defendant attempted his lane change. When the plaintiff merged into the westbound lane, she took reasonable care to ensure that there were no vehicles approaching from the west that could cause a hazard. The defendant would have observed the plaintiff's car in the left lane before attempting the lane change, had he exercised reasonable care. The plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$75,000</damage> in non-pecuniary damages. She suffered acute neck and shoulder pain that significantly interfered with her day-to-day living and enjoyment of life during the first 12 to 16 months after the accident. She used "on call" days to recuperate and sick days to deal with pain, had little or no social life, attended numerous medical appointments and took medications that resulted in additional health problems. She suffered occasional exacerbations that significantly affected her enjoyment of life after that time, but there were lengthy periods in which she was symptom-free. Doctors stated that, absent the exacerbations, she was capable of performing all basic daily activities and believed that her condition would likely continue to improve. The plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "past wage loss">$15,682</damage> in past income loss. She was entitled to the portion of the lost "on-call" days that she claimed, replenishment of the sick bank and the part-time job for a period not past the point at which she obtained the full-time position. The plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "future wage loss">$70,000</damage> in loss of earning capacity. A fair approach to the future loss from having to access the sick bank was to average the days that she missed from the teaching position in the four years since the accident as a result of the injuries. There was a substantial likelihood that her pain could interfere with her ability to achieve the Master's degree in the immediate three to four years. The plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "future care">$26,735</damage> in cost of future care. The award was based on what was reasonably necessary to assist in maintaining her general fitness and conditioning and in alleviating her symptoms when they become acute. The plaintiff was awarded <damage type = "special">$6172</damage> in special damages.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Motor Vehicle Act, , s. 175
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: M.R. Hoogbruin, M. Airton.
Counsel for the Defendants: M.A. Chaudhary.
Reasons for Judgment
INTRODUCTION
ISSUES
LIABILITY
A. Evidence concerning the Accident
B. Arguments concerning Liability
C. Decision concerning Liability
DAMAGES
A. Evidence
Plaintiff's Background
Causation
The Plaintiff's Medical Condition
Periodic Exacerbations
The Plaintiff's Career Post-Accident
The Physical Capacity Evaluation
B. Discussion
Non-Pecuniary Loss
Legal Principals
Positions of the Parties
Discussion
Past Income Loss
Teacher-on-Call Days
Sick Bank
Respite Care Job
Past Income Loss: Total Award
5. Future Income Loss/Loss of Earning Capacity
Use of Sick Days
Loss of opportunity to obtain the Master's Degree
Discussion
Cost of Future Care
Special Damages
General
Deductibility of Collateral Benefits
Mitigation
SUMMARY OF DAMAGES AWARDS
C.A. WEDGE J.
I. INTRODUCTION
1  Jennifer Kilian was injured in a motor vehicle accident in Vancouver on February 1, 2008, when her car was struck by a large semi-trailer truck driven by Cory Valentin and owned by Berezay Trucking Inc.
2  Ms. Kilian had just executed a left-hand turn from St. George Street ("St. George") onto Southeast Marine Drive ("S.E. Marine"), having entered a westbound traffic lane from a break in the median dividing the eastbound and westbound traffic. Mr. Valentin was driving his truck westbound in the middle lane on S.E. Marine. As he attempted to change lanes to the lane closest to the median, the left rear section of his trailer struck Ms. Kilian's car.
3  Ms. Kilian sought medical care the day after the accident for headaches and acute neck pain radiating into both shoulders. She also sought psychiatric treatment for driving anxiety caused by the accident. While her driving anxiety and her ongoing pain symptoms have resolved over time, Ms. Kilian continues to suffer from occasional episodes of acute neck pain.
4  In this action, Ms. Kilian sought damages for the losses she alleges she suffered as a result of the injuries she sustained in the accident.
5  The defendants did not deny that Ms. Kilian suffered injuries as a result of the accident, but denied that the accident was the result of negligence on the part of Mr. Valentin. They acknowledged that Ms. Kilian's injuries were caused by the accident and that if Mr. Valentin was at fault, Ms. Kilian is entitled to damages for those injuries. However, the defendants disputed the extent of her injuries and the duration of her pain symptoms.
II. ISSUES
6  The issues are the following:
Are the defendants liable, in whole or in part, for the accident?
If so, what damages ought to be awarded for the injuries Ms. Kilian suffered in the accident? More specifically, is Ms. Kilian entitled to:
non-pecuniary damages;
past wage loss;
future wage loss;
cost of future care;
diminished housekeeping capacity; and/or
special damages?
7  For the reasons that follow, I have concluded that the defendants are liable for Ms. Kilian's injuries because Mr. Valentin was wholly at fault for the accident. I have also concluded that Ms. Kilian is entitled to damages under most, but not all heads of damage claimed.
III. LIABILITY
A. Evidence concerning the Accident
8  The accident occurred at about 1:30 p.m. on February 1, 2008. Ms. Kilian had just left a store on St. George, south of S.E. Marine. She was driving her 1996 Honda sedan, and was alone in the car.
9  S.E. Marine is a main traffic artery in Vancouver, running east and west. It has three lanes in each direction, connecting Vancouver with municipalities such as Burnaby and New Westminster. S.E. Marine is heavily used by trucks transporting goods between the outlying municipalities and the industrial areas of Vancouver.
10  St. George is not a through street, running only on the south side of S.E. Marine. It intersects with S.E. Marine and ends at that point in a T-intersection. Traffic at the T-intersection is governed by a stop sign. A concrete median divides the east- and westbound traffic along this stretch of S.E. Marine. There is a break in the concrete median at the T-intersection, which is designed to allow traffic from St. George to access the westbound lanes. The median break is approximately the width of one traffic lane. Vehicles accessing the westbound lanes must cross the eastbound lanes of S.E. Marine, enter the median break, and then turn left into a westbound lane.
11  Ms. Kilian's destination was to the west. She stopped her car at the stop sign on St. George until there was a break in the eastbound traffic. She then drove across the eastbound lanes and stopped at the median break. After waiting for the westbound traffic to clear, she completed her left turn into the westbound lane closest to the concrete median and began accelerating as she headed west.
12  Mr. Valentin, in the meantime, was driving his semi-trailer truck westbound in the centre lane on S.E. Marine. The truck is 22 feet long, and the trailer attached to his truck at the time was either 48 or 53 feet in length.
13  Mr. Valentin's destination was an industrial park located to the south of S.E. Marine. Access to the industrial park required a left turn on to Main Street, which is a through street located a short distance beyond the T-intersection at St. George. As he approached the T-intersection, Mr. Valentin decided to change from the centre of the three westbound lanes to the left lane in preparation for his left turn on to Main Street. He was not aware of the median break at the T-intersection allowing vehicle access from St. George to S.E. Marine.
14  The concrete median ends approximately 40 metres to the west of the T-intersection and is replaced by a solid yellow line. Ms. Kilian had travelled the length of the median, and had just cleared it when the left rear section of Mr. Valentin's trailer struck the passenger side of Ms. Kilian's car. Ms. Kilian sounded her car horn and she either swerved or was pushed by the impact into the closest eastbound lane. Fortunately, there were no vehicles travelling eastbound in that lane at the time.
15  Mr. Valentin recalled checking in his left rear view mirror before beginning his lane change. The lane was clear at that time. He recalled that approximately 5 seconds later, as he was in the process of executing the lane change, he looked in his rear view mirror a second time. Only then did he see Ms. Kilian's car. At that point, he observed the Honda Civic travelling westbound in the left lane. Mr. Valentin swerved back into the centre lane in an attempt to avoid the accident, but the left rear axle of the trailer hit Ms. Kilian's car as he did so.
16  Mr. Valentin did not see Ms. Kilian's car at any point in time before the accident.
17  Ms. Kilian recalled that at the time the trailer struck her car, she had been travelling westbound in the lane closest to the median for approximately 5 to 10 seconds. She estimated that she had reached a speed of approximately 40 km/h at that time. She knew the impact occurred after she had travelled beyond the length of the concrete median because her car crossed the yellow line into the eastbound lane when she was struck.
18  The rear view mirror on the passenger side of Ms. Kilian's car was torn off by the impact and landed at the kerb beyond the farthest eastbound lane. There was also damage to the right passenger door area and the front of the right quarter panel.
B. Arguments concerning Liability
19  The defendants denied liability, arguing that Ms. Kilian created a hazardous situation by executing the left turn in two stages instead of one.
20  Ms. Kilian awaited clearance of the eastbound traffic before advancing across S.E. Marine to the median break, and then waited 30 to 40 seconds for clearance of the westbound traffic before proceeding into the westbound lane. According to the defendants, Ms. Kilian should have waited at the stop sign on St. George until the roadway was clear of both eastbound and westbound traffic, and then executed her turn onto S.E. Marine westbound without first stopping in the median break. By proceeding into the median break and then stopping until the westbound traffic had cleared, argued the defendants, Ms. Kilian:
... created an unusual situation resulting in her vehicle entering westbound S.E. Marine Drive from a position where drivers would not expect and in an area where they may not be on the lookout for [a vehicle] ...
21  Having created this hazardous situation, argued the defendants, Ms. Kilian then tried to execute an unsafe turn onto S.E. Marine when it ought to have been apparent that Mr. Valentin was attempting a lane change from the middle to the left lane.
22  Ms. Kilian argued that the theory of the defendants concerning liability does not accord with the physical evidence. In order to accept the defendants' theory, one must conclude that the impact occurred while Ms. Kilian was attempting to turn into the westbound lane from the median break. However, the physical evidence establishes that Ms. Kilian was fully in the westbound lane and had already travelled a considerable distance when Mr. Valentin attempted his lane change. Accordingly, Mr. Valentin ought to have observed Ms. Kilian's vehicle before he attempted to change lanes, and was negligent in failing to do so.
C. Decision concerning Liability
23  I do not accept the defendants' position concerning liability. The defendants were unable to cite any statutory provisions or case law in support of their argument that the operator of a motor vehicle must execute a left turn in the "one stage" manner they describe.
24  The only statutory provisions cited to me in argument that have any possible relevance in these circumstances are ss. 144 and 175 of the Motor Vehicle Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 318.
25  Section 144 imposes a general duty upon all motorists not to drive without due care and attention or without reasonable consideration for others using the highway.
26  Section 175 states as follows:
If a vehicle that is about to enter a through highway has stopped in compliance with section 186,
the driver of the vehicle must yield the right of way to traffic that has entered the intersection on the through highway or is approaching so closely on it that it constitutes an immediate hazard, and
having yielded, the driver may proceed with caution.
If a vehicle is entering a through highway in compliance with subsection (1), traffic approaching the intersection on the highway must yield the right of way to the entering vehicle while it is proceeding into or across the highway.
27  The defendants argued that s. 175 imposed a duty on Ms. Kilian to remain at the St. George intersection until both the eastbound and westbound lanes were clear. I do not accept that argument. Section 175 applies most plainly to circumstances in which a motorist is attempting a conventional left turn across a thoroughfare with multiple lanes of oncoming traffic. In that situation, the motorist must assess whether there is a vehicle or vehicles in any of the approaching lanes which constitute an immediate hazard. That assessment cannot be made on a lane-by-lane basis: Carich v. Cook  (B.C.C.A.).
28  Median breaks such as the one at the St. George T-intersection present a different challenge and may well require a two-stage assessment when they are used by motorists. There are no statutory provisions directly applicable. As observed by Groberman J.A. in Salaam v. Abramovic,  at para. 21, ultimately a court must determine whether each of the parties in an accident met their common law duties of care. That determination is informed not only by the rules of the road but by the reasonableness of the actions of the parties. Mr. Justice Groberman explained, as follows, why that is the case:
[21] This is both because the rules of the road cannot comprehensively cover all possible scenarios, and because users of the road are expected to exercise reasonable care, even when others have failed to respect their right of way. While s. 175 of the Motor Vehicle Act and other rules of the road are important in determining whether the standard of care was met, they are not the exclusive measures of that standard.
29  Common sense would suggest that Ms. Kilian, when halted at the stop sign on St. George, had a duty to first determine whether there were any eastbound vehicles posing a hazard to her crossing the eastbound lanes. Once across the eastbound lanes and halted in the median break, she had a duty to determine whether there were any westbound vehicles which posed a hazard to her entering a westbound lane.
30  In short, the median at the intersection between St. George and S.E. Marine was there to be used in precisely the manner it was used by Ms. Kilian.
31  The issue is whether Ms. Kilian, once having entered the median break, exercised reasonable care in assessing that there was no westbound traffic posing a hazard before she proceeded to enter the westbound lane in question.
32  The defendants' theory rests on their assertion that Ms. Kilian must have been in the process of entering the left lane when she was struck by Mr. Valentin's trailer. However, the physical evidence does not support that assertion. The physical evidence supports Ms. Kilian's assertion that she was fully in the left lane, heading westbound, and had travelled at least 40 metres beyond the median before Mr. Valentin attempted his lane change. Mr. Valentin's evidence also supports Ms. Kilian's version of events. He acknowledged that when he first noticed Ms. Kilian's vehicle just before impact, it was fully in the left lane travelling westbound.
33  I am satisfied that at the time Ms. Kilian merged into the westbound lane on S.E. Marine, she took reasonable care to ensure there were no vehicles approaching from the west that could cause a hazard to her or others. She took reasonable care to ensure her safety and that of other users of the road. Had Mr. Valentin been exercising reasonable care as he proceeded in the centre lane, he would have observed Ms. Kilian's car in the left lane before he attempted the lane change. Having concluded that Mr. Valentin failed to exercise reasonable care, I conclude that the defendants are liable for the damages suffered by Ms. Kilian as a result of the accident.
IV. DAMAGES
A. Evidence
1. Plaintiff's Background
34  Ms. Kilian is now 31 years of age. She was 28 at the time of the accident in 2008.
35  Ms. Kilian was born and raised in Richmond, B.C. She graduated from high school in 1998, after which she attended the University of British Columbia. She obtained a Bachelor of Arts in geography in 2002, and a Bachelor of Education in elementary school education in 2007.
36  Before obtaining her teaching qualifications, Ms. Kilian worked as an event coordinator for the Children's Wish Foundation and for an out-of-school care program. She also spent three years working in the cruise ship industry as an event coordinator.
37  In the fall of 2007, Ms. Kilian obtained a temporary teaching position at Errington Elementary School in Richmond working four days per week in a .8 full time equivalent ("FTE") position. She also made herself available the remaining one day per week for assignments as a teacher on call ("TOC").
38  As noted earlier, the accident occurred in February 2008. By then, Ms. Kilian had been teaching at Errington on a temporary contract for five months. Ms. Kilian's temporary contract was renewed for the 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 school years.
39  In May 2010, Ms. Kilian obtained a graduate diploma from Simon Fraser University in Learning Assistance. In September 2010, Ms. Kilian became a permanent teach at Errington with the Richmond School District working under a continuing contract.
40  Ms. Kilian purchased a condominium in Richmond in 2007, where she continues to live. From November 2010 to May 2012 she lived in a relationship with Brendan Jones, but that relationship has now ended. She has no children.
41  Ms. Kilian's health before the accident was excellent. She had no physical limitations. She was outgoing and enjoyed a busy social life with a wide group of friends. She enjoyed going to the pub to watch hockey games, and attending clubs to dance. While she was not committed to any particular athletic endeavours, Ms. Kilian was quite physically active and participated in a variety of recreational activities such as golf, wakeboarding and scuba diving. She also travelled extensively.
2. Causation
42  As noted earlier, the passenger side of Ms. Kilian's car was damaged and the rear view mirror torn off in the accident. The damage involved scrapes and some dents. The cost of the repairs was <damage type = "other">$2,644</damage>.
43  The medical evidence called at trial by the plaintiff established that the accident caused the onset of Ms. Kilian's medical issues and has been the cause of her ongoing difficulties.
44  Causation was not disputed. Although the defendants disputed the extent and severity of Ms. Kilian's symptoms, they readily acknowledged at trial that she suffered myofacial (soft tissue) injuries in the February 2008 accident, and developed a significant (although now resolved) driving phobia. The defendants also acknowledged that in the event liability is established, Ms. Kilian is entitled to some compensation for those injuries and symptoms.
3. The Plaintiff's Medical Condition
45  Ms. Kilian was emotionally shaken following the accident, but did not think it necessary to seek medical assistance immediately. She drove to her parent's home and stayed there for the balance of the day. By early evening, she was experiencing headaches radiating from pain in her neck. She attended a walk-in clinic in Richmond the following morning, where she was assessed by a physician and given pain medication and muscle relaxants.
46  Ms. Kilian then sought and obtained a medical appointment with her family physician, Dr. Ted Cragg, on February 7, 2008. At that visit, she reported pain in her neck, shoulders and head. The most severe and persistent problem was her neck pain.
47  Ms. Kilian's symptoms were most acute in the first six months post-accident, and remained quite acute for a year to 16 months. To deal with her neck and shoulder pain, she received massage, chiropractic and acupuncture treatments. Her physician initially prescribed morphine for the pain, but the morphine affected her mental acuity. She was then prescribed codeine, but she suffered an allergic reaction to the drug. Tramacet, another pain medication prescribed by her physician, made her nauseous. Celebrex caused stomach bleeding. She was finally prescribed Dilaudid, which she took only before bed because of its sedative effects.
48  Ms. Kilian spent a great deal of time in the first year after the accident attending medical and therapeutic appointments. She continued to work in her contract teaching position, but took several days off due to her neck and shoulder pain. In addition, she removed herself from the TOC list and, as a result, worked only a four-day week. In that first year following the accident, Ms. Kilian also attended medical and therapeutic appointments up to three times per week.
49  In his medical report dated August 26, 2009, Dr. Cragg reviewed his chart notes concerning Ms. Kilian's appointments during the first year following the accident, and summarized Ms. Kilian's condition as follows:
... Ms. Kilian experienced substantial disability for over one year, as a direct result of the accident in question. There were numerous visits in which she was in tears because of the pain, frustration with the slowness of recovery, and because of her inability to engage in aspects of her work, recreational and social life. I was also impressed with her willingness to try any reasonable medicinal, physical or alternative treatments to help her along the road to recovery, and to perform the regular physiotherapeutic manoeuvres she was taught to do on her own. Despite her often disabling symptoms Ms. Kilian carried on with her teaching work except for occasional days when her symptoms precluded being able to function.
50  Dr. Cragg's diagnosis was as follows:
The diagnosis is of myofascial and ligamentous strain primarily of the upper neck and its attachments to the base of the skull, brought on by abrupt acceleration/deceleration movements of the head in relation to the neck, at the moment of impact.
51  Dr. Cragg also stated that the prognosis for Ms. Kilian's complete recovery was uncertain at that time.
52  Ms. Kilian continued to see Dr. Cragg until he retired from practice in January 2010. She then began seeing Dr. Cheryl Hau. In her medical report dated June 23, 2011, Dr. Hau stated as follows:
After the initial year after her MVA, Jennifer's neck pain and headaches improved and she only suffered occasional flare-ups, which required Dilaudid (hydromorphone) to ease her symptoms. She reported that she had been about 70% better up until a recent ankle sprain in April 2011. She routinely manages her neck pain and headaches with Yoga and stretches. However, with her recent ankle sprain, she hadn't been able to participate in Yoga and stretches. Thus, her neck pain and headaches worsened and she reported that she is only 50% better now.
Jennifer is currently able to complete all her activities of daily living and all her instrumental activities of daily living. However, she does find that she has modified some of her activities (e.g., carrying multiple lighter loads of groceries versus one large load). She hasn't participated in the same recreational activities as those she enjoyed prior to her MVA. ...
53  Dr. Hau's diagnosis was "chronic myofascial pain and cervicogenic headaches secondary to a MVA." Dr. Hau provided a prescription for hydromorphone and amitriptyline, and advised Ms. Kilian to resume yoga when her ankle sprain settled.
54  Dr. Hau provided a further report dated February 13, 2012, which summarized Ms. Kilian's visits and treatments from August 2011 to the date of the report. Dr. Hau described an exacerbation in Ms. Kilian's neck symptoms which occurred following a vacation trip to Calgary in August 2011. This exacerbation continued until November 2011, when it abated. However, Dr. Hau noted that a further exacerbation occurred in December 2011 and extended into January 2012, following a period of inactivity due to a series of respiratory infections.
55  Dr. Hau reported that currently Ms. Kilian continues to have some chronic neck pain with occasional acute exacerbations which requires prescription medications such as hydromorphone and therapy such as massage and chiropractic therapy. It was Dr. Hau's opinion that Ms. Kilian would be required to take days off work when the neck pain was severe.
56  Ms. Kilian also attended a specialist in physical medicine and rehabilitation, Dr. John le Nobel. He assessed Ms. Kilian on three occasions: July 12, 2010, April 20, 2011, and March 13, 2012. He submitted two reports dated April 28, 2011 and March 14, 2012.
57  Dr. le Nobel testified that the objective findings of his physical examinations of Ms. Kilian on each occasion were normal -- that is to say, the range of motion in Ms. Kilian's neck and shoulders were within the normal range. In the most recent examination of March 2012, Ms. Kilian did not complain of any pain or tenderness in her neck and shoulders, but reported that she had experienced acute pain during exacerbations of her neck symptoms on two occasions in the preceding months.
58  Dr. le Nobel confirmed that Ms. Kilian had improved between the first and last assessments. In his report dated March 14, 2012, he stated that further improvement in Ms. Kilian's condition was "reasonably anticipated through the exercise based rehabilitation". However, barring some "as yet unachieved improvement" he did not anticipate a "full return to all of her pre-accident capabilities".
59  Dr. le Nobel explained that his guarded prognosis was based on Ms. Kilian's reports of occasional but ongoing exacerbations of her neck pain. He stated in his most recent report that "the longer a chronic pain condition persists the more likely it will continue in the future".
60  Although Dr. le Nobel expressed reservations about Ms. Kilian achieving her "pre-accident capabilities", he did not suggest that Ms. Kilian was currently experiencing, or would experience in the future, functional limitations with respect to her work as a teacher or her normal activities of daily living. The most significant concern, according to Dr. le Nobel, was the occasional exacerbation of the chronic neck condition which was likely to occur from time to time into the foreseeable future.
61  Ms. Kilian also developed driving anxiety following the accident, for which she eventually sought treatment from a psychiatrist, Dr. Roy O'Shaughnessy, and psychological counselling on referral. Approximately 18 months post-accident, Dr. O'Shaughnessy was of the opinion that Ms. Kilian continued to suffer from driving phobia which left her with a partial disability. At that point, Ms. Kilian was able to drive on a day-to-day basis in the Richmond area close to her home, but could not drive longer distances or in busy areas such as downtown Vancouver.
62  Ms. Kilian obtained treatment from a clinical psychologist and the driving phobia is now completely resolved.
63  In the 12 to 16 months following the accident, Ms. Kilian reduced her teaching hours because of her neck and shoulder pain and as a result of attending numerous medical and therapeutic appointments. Instead of arriving at school at least an hour before the children arrived and staying an hour after they left, she would arrive shortly before the children arrived and leave immediately after they left.
64  Ms. Kilian testified about the extent of the pain and discomfort she experienced in the year following the accident. She was working four days per week teaching Grades 2 through 4 children, and worked the fifth day as a teacher on call for the school district. She continued teaching in her temporary contract position following the accident, and took as few sick days as possible despite her neck and shoulder pain, because she was a relatively new hire and did not want to jeopardize her future job opportunities with the school district. However, she did not make herself available for TOC assignments the fifth day of work because she used that time to rest and recover from her scheduled days of teaching.
65  Ms. Kilian also used a number of sick days following the accident. She took the sick days during the months immediately after the accident in order to cope with her ongoing pain. Thereafter, she used the sick days when she experienced the episodic exacerbations.
66  Ms. Kilian testified that during the first year post-accident, the neck pain was aggravated by the physical demands of her job, disrupted sleep and headaches. Aggravation of the neck symptoms made her more temperamental and irritable with colleagues and students, and with her family and friends. She tried numerous prescription drugs and therapeutic interventions.
67  Despite these difficulties, Ms. Kilian testified that she continued to perform all of her activities of daily living and performed her housework without assistance. She was no longer meticulous about cleaning, and left some heavier chores unfinished from time to time, but she performed all basic housework and chores.
68  Ms. Kilian agreed with Dr. Hau's impression that after the first year post-accident, her neck pain and headaches improved with the exception of the occasional times during which she experienced an exacerbation or flare-up of her symptoms. She also agreed with Dr. Hau's observation that routine yoga and stretching were effective techniques for the management of her neck pain.
69  Several lay witnesses testified at trial about the effect of Ms. Kilian's injuries on her functioning and emotional well-being. Ms. Kilian's closest friend, Jamie Lepore, testified that she saw Ms. Kilian much less frequently after the accident. They discontinued their longstanding practice of meeting weekly to watch a favorite television program, and Ms. Kilian frequently cancelled evening walks due to her neck pain.
70  Ms. Kilian's mother, Marj Kilian, testified that following the accident, Ms. Kilian lost her characteristic "sparkle". In the ensuing year, Ms. Kilian was much less social and her mood became quite low. Marj Kilian has observed that although her daughter has gradually improved over time, she still suffers exacerbations and has never fully regained her previous disposition.
71  Before the accident, Ms. Kilian provided respite care for four hours every Monday evening for a young boy, Ben, who suffered from severe autism and was living with his grandmother. She gave the care under a contract with the Richmond Society for Community Living. Ms. Kilian had formed a special bond with Ben. Following the accident, Ms. Kilian found that she could not properly care for Ben. She had neither the physical nor the emotional capacity to do so. She gave up the work, and the society found a replacement caregiver.
72  Ms. Kilian's former school principal, Rita Gibbs, testified about Ms. Kilian's physical limitations as a teacher in the year following the accident. Ms. Gibbs was the principal at Errington Elementary from 2006 until late 2011. At the time of the accident in February 2008, Ms. Kilian had been working at the school as a temporary teacher for approximately five months. Ms. Gibbs observed that in the school year following the accident Ms. Kilian taught a physical education class but took care not to demonstrate strenuous aspects of sports and did not take part in several of the activities. Ms. Gibbs recalled that during the first year after the accident, she told Ms. Kilian on several occasions to leave immediately after class because she observed Ms. Kilian to be in obvious pain.
73  Ms. Gibbs testified that despite her physical limitations, Ms. Kilian was a gifted and dedicated teacher with a great sense of responsibility to her students and to the school. According to Ms. Gibbs, Ms. Kilian had the potential to progress within the school system to administrative positions such as Vice-Principal and Principal. Ms. Gibbs encouraged Ms. Kilian to consider administration as a long-term career goal.
74  As the school principal, Ms. Gibbs was responsible for completing yearly assessments concerning the teaching performance of teachers at Errington Elementary. The assessments concerning Ms. Kilian, which were completed after the accident, were glowing in nature. She had only positive comments to make about all aspects of Ms. Kilian's job performance.
75  Brendan Jones testified at trial. He met Ms. Kilian in August 2010, more than two years after the accident. He moved into her condominium in November 2010, and lived with her in an intimate relationship from then until May 2012.
76  He testified that Ms. Kilian's neck symptoms, while of varying degrees, always presented a level of discomfort for her. He described Ms. Kilian's daily routine as going to work early in the morning, running errands after work or attending medical appointments, coming home and having dinner, and then watching television or relaxing with a book. He described himself as having become something of a "house husband", performing quite a bit of housework. He acknowledged, however, that during this time he was taking courses and studying at home.
77  Mr. Jones testified that he left the relationship for a number of reasons, some of which were unrelated to Ms. Kilian's physical difficulties. However, Mr. Jones suggested that as an avid sportsperson, he had become restless with their somewhat sedentary lifestyle which he attributed to Ms. Kilian's neck symptoms. He had also tired of the demands on his time which he perceived to be, at least in part, the result of her injury.
78  Ms. Kilian's perspective was somewhat different. She recalled that she was primarily responsible for the housework while Mr. Jones shared some of the cooking responsibilities and did some of the more strenuous chores such as taking out the garbage. There was no yard work or maintenance because Ms. Kilian's home is a relatively new condominium with a deck but no yard.
79  Ms. Kilian testified that she attempted to become involved in more sports as a result of her relationship with Mr. Jones. She attempted to learn to ski. On a trip to Alberta in 2011, she went with Mr. Jones to the Olympic Park in Calgary and, at his encouragement, participated in bob sledding and zip lining with him. The trip to Calgary resulted in an episode of acute neck pain which lasted through the fall of 2011.
4. Periodic Exacerbations
80  Dr. Cragg's records reflect that Ms. Kilian reported in September 2008 that she rated her ongoing pain at "2 to 3 out of 10" with occasional exacerbations. Dr. Hau, who became Ms. Kilian's family physician in February 2010, documented a number of recent exacerbations. The first occurred in August 2011, following the trip to Calgary where Ms. Kilian participated in bobsledding and zip lining. The second occurred in November 2011, and appears to have been related to the August 2011 difficulties.
81  In December 2011, Ms. Kilian suffered an upper respiratory infection which prevented her from performing her yoga and stretching exercising. That led to an exacerbation of her neck pain in late December 2011. Another respiratory infection in January 2012 triggered a further exacerbation.
82  At trial, Ms. Kilian testified that she had suffered another exacerbation in late March 2012 which was ongoing. The exacerbation occurred following a session with the kinesiologist who designed an active exercise rehabilitation program for Ms. Kilian.
83  Approximately six weeks before trial, Mr. Jones ended the relationship. Ms. Kilian testified that she had not expected the relationship to end. She had hoped to marry Mr. Jones, and the termination of the relationship came as a shock to her. She has suffered stress as a result, which has manifested itself in loss of appetite and intensification of her neck pain.
5. The Plaintiff's Career Post-Accident
84  Ms. Kilian testified that it had always been her dream to work as a classroom teacher in an elementary school. She was thrilled to obtain the temporary teaching contract with the Richmond School District.
85  As noted earlier, Ms. Kilian's temporary teaching contract was renewed for the school year 2008-2009 following the accident. It was renewed again for the subsequent school year, 2009-2010. In each of those years, Ms. Kilian taught at the junior elementary level.
86  In May 2008, Ms. Kilian began attending a part-time graduate studies program offered by Simon Fraser University. The program qualifies teachers to work as Resource Room teachers and provide instruction to students for whom English is a second language ("ESL"). Resource Room teachers work with students and their teachers, providing special help and resources for students who require additional assistance. Many such students are also ESL students. Ms. Kilian was interested in working as a Resource Room teacher and, as a result, participated in the program while working at Errington Elementary.
87  The graduate studies program required Ms. Kilian to attend the program every Wednesday evening for several hours, and for two concentrated weeks during the summer. Ms. Kilian participated in the program from May 2008 to May 2010, when she successfully obtained her graduate diploma.
88  Ms. Kilian was the successful applicant for a full-time continuing job at Errington Elementary as the Resource Room/ESL teacher commencing in September 2010. Ms. Gibbs testified that continuing teaching jobs are rare in the Richmond School District and competition for the jobs is fierce. Ms. Kilian's successful candidacy spoke to her excellence as a teacher and her successful completion of the graduate studies diploma.
89  Dr. Leyton Schnellert was an instructor and faculty associate at Simon Fraser University, teaching in the graduate diploma program for much of the time Ms. Kilian attended the program. Dr. Schnellert interacted with Ms. Kilian on a weekly basis during the school year, and on a daily basis during the intensive summer program.
90  Dr. Schnellert testified at trial that Ms. Kilian was an excellent student in the diploma program. She completed all of her assignments promptly and diligently, and some of her assignments were of such good quality that they could have been submitted to professional teaching journals. She was highly organized and very committed to the program. She was also very generous with her time. By way of example, he recalled that she assisted a classmate who was sick during the program.
91  Students who complete the graduate studies diploma may apply for the Masters of Education program at SFU and, as a result of having obtained the diploma, can obtain the Masters degree with one further year of study instead of the usual two years. There is one proviso: students who have obtained the diploma must gain entry to the Masters program within three years of completing the diploma.
92  Dr. Schnellert testified that entry to the Masters program is highly competitive as only 20 students are admitted each year.
93  Ms. Kilian applied for entry to the Masters program in January 2012, hoping to begin the program in the fall of 2012. Applicants must submit two pieces of written work in support of the application. Ms. Kilian did so. However, she learned in March 2012 that her application was not successful, primarily because of inadequacies in one of the papers she submitted. Ms. Kilian expressed the view that the quality of the written pieces she submitted with her application were likely affected by the exacerbation of her neck pain at the time she applied.
94  Ms. Kilian has regarded her current teaching job as the culmination of a life-long dream. Until recently, she expressed the view that she wished to remain a classroom teacher and did not intend to pursue a job in teaching administration. However, at trial Ms. Kilian testified that as a result of encouragement from her former principal, Ms. Gibbs, in the fall of 2011, she has begun to consider the possibility of eventually applying for a Vice-Principal or Principal position. She acknowledged that administration was a long-term goal. Ms. Gibbs worked as a teacher for over 25 years before she was appointed as a Vice-Principal, and another 5 years before she was appointed Principal of Errington Elementary.
95  As noted earlier, Ms. Gibbs expressed great confidence in Ms. Kilian's ability to move into an administrative position at some point in the future.
6. The Physical Capacity Evaluation
96  Ms. Kilian participated in a Physical Capacity Evaluation in August 2011, conducted by Cynthia Morin, Occupational Therapist. A report dated October 5, 2011, prepared by Ms. Morin, was submitted at trial by counsel for Ms. Kilian (the "PCE Report").
97  The stated purpose of the evaluation was to determine the feasibility of employment for Ms. Kilian. Ms. Morin concludes, based on her extensive testing, that Ms. Kilian is considered to be employable (with a few physical restrictions) on both a part-time and full-time basis, with the potential to work in limited, light, and some medium strength occupations. Specifically, the report concluded that Ms. Kilian is employable as a teacher, but with restrictions relating primarily to work that requires prolonged periods of sitting, repetitive overhead reaching, and postures requiring sustained neck flexion.
98  The PCE Report is detailed and thorough. However, I have concluded that it is of limited assistance to the Court. Ms. Kilian is qualified as an elementary school teacher. She has been teaching since shortly before the accident, and has been performing well above expected standards for that entire time. All but five months of her teaching career has been post-accident. For three of those years, she taught elementary school children as a classroom teacher.
99  Ms. Kilian's work is now quite specialized. She is qualified to provide teaching assistance and additional resources to students. She has obtained a full-time continuing position in that area. As a Resource Room/ESL teacher, she supports other teachers and their students. She is also part of the School Based Team which evaluates students to determine the kind of additional educational resources they may require.
100  The assessment did not test for the specific requirements of Ms. Kilian's job, nor does the PCE Report focus on those requirements.
101  Ms. Kilian was tested for six hours, with one half hour break. Many of the tests involved physical exertion that was not required of Ms. Kilian as an elementary school teacher or, more specifically, as a Resource/ESL teacher.
102  Neither Ms. Kilian nor Ms. Gibbs, who evaluated Ms. Kilian's classroom performance, testified that Ms. Kilian was incapable of performing any of the physical requirements of her job. As noted earlier, Ms. Kilian was careful in the first year after the accident to limit her participation in the activities she taught in her P.E. classes. Ms. Kilian said that the most significant challenge occurred during the longer meetings with other teachers and the school-based team, when she experienced neck and shoulder pain. When that occurred, she stood and stretched or changed her position in the classroom. However, she did not suggest that any job modifications were necessary.
103  Ms. Gibbs was a highly supportive principal. She testified that teachers in the Richmond School District could request ergonomic assessments of their workplaces. Ms. Kilian did not make any such request, nor did she suggest in her evidence that she required any modifications to her classroom or her work functions generally.
104  In cross-examination, Ms. Morin was taken through the results of the functional tests as they related to the specific requirements of Ms. Kilian's job. She agreed that when considering the specific demands of the job, Ms. Kilian was capable of performing them.
105  Ms. Morin's most recent interaction with Ms. Kilian was on September 15, 2011. In the report she submitted shortly thereafter, Ms. Morin noted that Ms. Kilian intended to continue working as a classroom teacher for the foreseeable future. For that reason, the classroom environment in which she currently works was not likely to change, and no worksite assessment was necessary.
B. Discussion
106  Ms. Kilian has claimed damages under several heads. Discussion concerning each head of damage, and my decision concerning an award for each, follows.
1. Non-Pecuniary Loss
Legal Principals
107  The purpose of an award for non-pecuniary loss is to compensate the plaintiff for pain, suffering, disability, and loss of enjoyment of life. The loss must be assessed for both losses suffered by the plaintiff to the date of trial and for those she will suffer in the future. The award of a sum of money is to permit the plaintiff to substitute other amenities for those she has lost.
108  In Stapley v. Hejslet,  [Stapley], Kirkpatrick J.A., writing for a majority of the Court, quoted Lindal v. Lindal,  with respect to the underlying rationale for non-pecuniary damages and the considerations that should guide a court in awarding such damages (at para. 45):
[45] Thus the amount of an award for non-pecuniary damage should not depend alone upon the seriousness of the injury but upon its ability to ameliorate the condition of the victim considering his or her particular situation. It therefore will not follow that in considering what part of the maximum should be awarded the gravity of the injury alone will be determinative. An appreciation of the individual's loss is the key and the "need for solace will not necessarily correlate with the seriousness of the injury" [Emphasis in original.]
109  The factors to be considered, outlined by the Court in Stapley, are now well-established. They include the following:
* the age of the plaintiff;
* the nature of the injury;
* the severity and duration of pain;
* disability;
* emotional suffering;
* loss or impairment of life;
* impairment of family, marital and social relationships;
* impairment of physical and mental abilities;
* the plaintiff's stoicism (a factor that should not penalize the plaintiff).
2. Positions of the Parties
110  Ms. Kilian argued that she suffered acute pain and anxiety following the accident which drastically affected both her social and her working life in the first year following the accident. The neck pain is now chronic, she submits, and continues to have a disabling effect as a result of the periodic exacerbations.
111  Ms. Kilian seeks non-pecuniary damages in the amount of <damage type = "other">$95,000</damage>.
112  The defendants do not dispute that Ms. Kilian is entitled to damages for non-pecuniary loss as a result of the pain and disruption to her life in the aftermath of the accident. The defendants' position is that while Ms. Kilian suffered acute neck pain in the first six to twelve months following the accident, her symptoms largely resolved within the first year. The defendants noted that Ms. Kilian acknowledged having good years in 2010 and 2011, until the exacerbation of her neck pain in the fall of 2011. They argued that although there have been occasional exacerbations of the neck pain, the most recent ones cannot be attributed to the accident. Overall, said the defendants, Ms. Kilian has managed to carry on a normal life for the past three years.
113  The defendants argue that an award of non-pecuniary damages should be in the range of <damage type = "other">$55,000</damage>.
3. Discussion
114  I have reviewed the case law cited by the parties. Of those cited by Ms. Kilian, the fact patterns in the decisions of Kasidoulis v. Russo,  and Pham-Fraser v. Smith,  [Pham-Fraser] most closely resemble the facts of this case. The plaintiff in each case suffered slightly more severe injuries than Ms. Kilian, and the ongoing physical limitations were somewhat more severe than hers. In those cases, the non-pecuniary damages awards were <damage type = "other">$90,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$95,000</damage> respectively.
115  The defendants cited authorities in which the range of damages for non-pecuniary loss was <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$75,000</damage> (Boyle v. Prentice, ; Tarzwell v. Ewashina, ; Guthrie v. Narayan, ; and Chalmers v. Russell, ). The fact patterns in the first two cases cited most closely resemble those of the present case; in those cases, the awards for non-pecuniary loss were <damage type = "other">$75,000</damage> and <damage type = "other">$65,000</damage> respectively.
116  I accept the argument of Ms. Kilian that in the first year to 16 months following the accident, she suffered acute neck and shoulder pain which significantly interfered with her day-to-day living and enjoyment of life. She continued to work four days per week but used the fifth day, previously an "on call" day, to recuperate and used sick days to deal with the most acute episodes of pain. She had little or no social life. She attended numerous medical and therapeutic appointments. She was required to take medications for pain which resulted in additional health problems.
117  Ms. Kilian also experienced a significant driving phobia which required initial sessions with a psychiatrist and numerous follow up sessions with a clinical psychologist before the phobia resolved.
118  Ms. Kilian has had lengthy periods of time since the first year of the accident in which she has been symptom-free. I accept that there are occasional exacerbations which, while they last, significantly affect Ms. Kilian's enjoyment of life. All of the physicians who have offered opinions concerning Ms. Kilian's prognosis stated that absent the exacerbations, Ms. Kilian is capable of performing all of her basic activities of daily living. Further, they have stated that while their predictions are guarded, they believe the physical symptoms she experiences during exacerbations will likely continue to improve. None, however, predict that Ms. Kilian will be symptom-free in the future.
119  Taking into account all of the circumstances of Ms. Kilian's case, I conclude that an appropriate award for non-pecuniary loss is <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$75,000</damage>.
4. Past Income Loss
120  Ms. Kilian's claim for past income loss has three components, with which I will deal in turn.
Teacher-on-Call Days
121  First, Ms. Kilian claims for the loss of 15 TOC days with the Richmond School Board between February 15 and October 17, 2008. As noted earlier, at the time of the accident Ms. Kilian was working four days per week in her temporary teaching position and was available the fifth day of each week to be called in to cover absences of other teachers.
122  Ms. Kilian provided evidence of the days she was unavailable for TOC work as a result of her injuries or because she was attending appointments for medical treatment. Notably, while there were many more TOC days available, she has claimed a total of 15 TOC days in that period. The TOC rate in the 2007-2008 year was <damage type = "other">$225</damage> per day. All but one of the days claimed falls within that time period. The rate during the 2008-2009 year was <damage type = "other">$245</damage>. The total loss, gross, is <damage type = "other">$3,395</damage>.
123  The defendants argued that Ms. Kilian may not have been called on some of the days she has claimed, and that there ought to be a deduction for the contingency that Ms. Kilian may not have received an on-call assignment.
124  However, Ms. Kilian has not claimed for all days that TOC assignments may have been available to her. The claim for 15 TOC days takes into account the contingency argued by the defendants. Accordingly, Ms. Kilian is entitled to <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">$3,395</damage> for the lost TOC days. That amount is gross and is therefore subject to deductions for income tax.
Sick Bank
125  The second component is Ms. Kilian's claim for reimbursement of her claim for sick days from her sick bank entitlement under the collective agreement. Ms. Kilian kept a written record of the reasons for each sick day claimed. She has claimed only those days claimed as a result of her injuries. Ms. Kilian has used a total of 67.3 sick days, but her claim is limited to 29.6 days.
126  The cost to Ms. Kilian to buy back those 29.6 days is <damage type = "other">$307</damage>, for a total of <damage type = "other">$9,087</damage>. Ms. Kilian testified that she intended to buy back those days, as she has very few days left in her sick back and is concerned about future exacerbations of her neck symptoms.
127  I conclude that Ms. Kilian is entitled to an amount of <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">$9,087</damage> to replenish her sick bank. Given the purpose of this award, there will be no deduction for income taxes on this amount (Bjarnson v. Parks, ).
Respite Care Job
128  As noted earlier, before the accident Ms. Kilian was providing respite care to a child for four hours every second week through the Richmond Society for Community Living. She earned <damage type = "other">$56</damage> for each four-hour shift. She planned to carry on performing this work indefinitely, as she had developed a strong bond with the child. As a result of her injuries, she had to give up the job. An alternate caregiver was found for the child. The executive director of the Society testified that the child's family has continued to access respite care.
129  Ms. Kilian claimed damages in the amount of <damage type = "other">$6,552</damage>, representing the amount she would have earned had she continued providing the respite care up to the time of trial.
130  I accept that Ms. Kilian would likely have continued to provide respite care to the child for some time, but I do not accept that she would have continued the job for four years. In May 2008 Ms. Kilian enrolled in the graduate program at Simon Fraser University which took up several hours for one evening each week, and two weeks during the summer. After obtaining her diploma from the graduate program, she obtained a full-time continuing teaching position. At most, in my view, Ms. Kilian would have continued providing respite care until she obtained the full-time position in 2010. Accordingly, I award her <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">$3,200</damage> for the loss of income from the respite care job. This award is subject to income tax deductions.
Past Income Loss: Total Award
131  In total, Ms. Kilian is entitled to <damage type = "past wage loss">$15,682</damage> for past income loss.
5. Future Income Loss/Loss of Earning Capacity
132  Ms. Kilian's claim for future income loss has three components. The first concerns future access by Ms. Kilian to her sick bank for reasons related to the injuries she suffered in the accident. The second concerns the delay Ms. Kilian alleges she will suffer, as a result of her injuries, in obtaining her Master's Degree, and the economic consequences of such a delay with respect to her placement on the salary grid. The third, related to the second, concerns the likelihood that her injuries will impair her chances of obtaining an administrative position and the economic consequences of that impaired opportunity.
133  I will deal with these aspects of the claim in turn.
134  In Perren v. Lalari, , the Court of Appeal reiterated the burden carried by the plaintiff concerning loss of future earning capacity. At para. 32, the Court said the following:
[32] A plaintiff must always prove, as was noted by Donald J.A. in Steward, , by Bauman J. [as he then was] in Chang, , and by Tysoe J.A. in Romanchych, , that there is a real and substantial possibility of a future event leading to an income loss. If the plaintiff discharges that burden of proof, then depending upon the facts of the case, the plaintiff may prove the quantification of that loss of earning capacity, either on an earnings approach, as in Steenblok, , or a capital asset approach, as in Brown, . The former approach will be more useful when the loss is more easily measurable, as it was in Steenblok. The latter approach will be more useful when the loss is not as easily measurable, as in Pallos, , and Romanchych. [Emphasis in original.]
135  As the authorities establish, an appropriate award under this head of damage must be based on the medical evidence.
136  Ms. Kilian emphasized the further observation of the Court (at para. 32) that a plaintiff may be able to meet the burden of real and substantial possibility of a future loss of income despite having returned to his or her former employment.
137  Ms. Kilian submitted that while she missed very few work days in the months immediately following the accident, she limited her work to four days per week which gave her time to recover from the work week. In addition, at the time of the accident she was only a few months into her contract as a new teacher in the school district, and attended work even when in pain because she did not want to jeopardize her chances of obtaining a permanent position.
Use of Sick Days
138  I will turn first to the issue of the loss Ms. Kilian will likely suffer in the future as a result of having to access her sick bank when she has exacerbations of her neck pain.
139  As noted earlier, of the 67.3 sick days Ms. Kilian has used since February 1, 2008, 29.6 of them were used for reasons related to the injuries she suffered in the accident. Reviewing the use of sick days within a particular school year, she used as few as .4 of a day in the 2008-2009 school year, and as many as 9.4 in the 2011-2012 school year.
140  Ms. Kilian argued that the upward trend in her use of sick days for accident-related reasons establishes that she will require as many as 15 sick days per year in future as a result of her injury.
141  I do not accept Ms. Kilian's position for a number of reasons.
142  First, the medical evidence does not support the proposition that Ms. Kilian will require almost twice as many sick days in the future than she has used in the most recent school year to date which also happens to have been the year of the worst exacerbations. The medical evidence suggests an improvement over the years of the chronic neck pain. Ms. Kilian's family physician has documented a trend of gradual improvement. Dr. le Nobel, in cross-examination, stated that Ms. Kilian is likely to experience further improvement in the future so long as she adheres to an exercise rehabilitation program.
143  Second, Ms. Kilian used remarkably few sick days to deal with her accident- related injuries between 2009 and the first few months of 2011. Between those times, Ms. Kilian experienced very few exacerbations of her neck symptoms. The 2011-2012 school year was the exception. The evidence established several causes for this anomaly.
144  As noted earlier, shortly before the 2011-2012 school year began, Ms. Kilian participated in bobsledding and zip lining. I do not suggest that she should be penalized for having done so. However, until then, Ms. Kilian had not engaged in any strenuous sports or other demanding physical activities for more than three years. Both the bobsledding and zip lining would test the musculoskeletal stability and fitness of any person, much less someone who was deconditioned by her relative inactivity, and who also suffered from a chronic soft-tissue injury to the neck.
145  Secondly, Ms. Kilian suffered a succession of upper respiratory infections in the fall and winter of 2011-2012 which prevented her from participating in yoga and other conditioning activities. I accept that exacerbations resulting from such illnesses in the future will likely occur. However, I do not accept that the events of the past year establish a worsening or deteriorating condition. The weight of the medical evidence is that Ms. Kilian will likely cope well most of the time but suffer occasional setbacks such as those occurring as a result of severe colds in the past year.
146  Thirdly, Ms. Kilian's intimate relationship came to an abrupt and unexpected end in the spring of 2012. Ms. Kilian testified that she had anticipated marriage and a family with Mr. Jones, and that the emotional shock of his unilateral decision to terminate the relationship was devastating to her. The termination of the relationship contributed to the exacerbation of her chronic neck pain.
147  While it is not surprising that Ms. Kilian experienced exacerbations of her neck pain during this period of time, one cannot reasonably conclude that such exacerbations will intensify and require constantly increasing usage of sick time. To the contrary, until the 2011-2012 school year, it appeared that Ms. Kilian was gradually on course to minimize exacerbations of her neck pain.
148  In my view, a fair approach involves an averaging of the days Ms. Kilian has missed from her teaching position over the past four years as a result of her injuries. She missed 29.6 days for reasons relating to the injuries she suffered in the accident, or 7.4 days per year on average. The cost to the school district (and to the teacher, in order to replenish her sick bank) to fund a replacement teacher is <damage type = "other">$307</damage> per day, or <damage type = "other">$2,271.80</damage> per year. Assuming that Ms. Kilian will work until she is 62 years of age, and taking into account any contingencies, the present value is approximately <damage type = "other">$30,000</damage>. Accordingly, I award Ms. Kilian <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$30,000</damage> for the cost of future access to her sick bank.
Loss of opportunity to obtain the Master's Degree
149  As noted earlier, Ms. Kilian successfully completed the program leading to her graduate diploma from SFU after participating in the program between May 2008 and May 2010. Obtaining the diploma increased her pay scale as a teacher from a Scale 5 to a Scale 5 Plus.
150  Obtaining the diploma enables Ms. Kilian to apply for entry to a one-year Master's program, but she must succeed in entering the program by 2013. If she completes that program, her pay scale will increase to a Scale 6. Further, completion of the program would make her much more competitive for a position in teaching administration should she decide at some point in the future that she wishes to leave classroom teaching for an administrative position.
151  Ms. Kilian wished to enter the Master's program for the 2012-2013 school year. She prepared her application in January 2012. The application required the preparation of two written papers. Ms. Kilian testified that she wrote the second of the two papers during one of the exacerbations of her neck pain. Her application for the program was apparently rejected in large part because of the inadequacies in that paper.
152  Ms. Kilian has now re-applied to enter the Master's program. It was not known at the time of trial whether she was successful in obtaining entry into the program.
153  Ms. Kilian argued, firstly, that the injuries she suffered in the accident may have affected her chances of gaining entry to the Master's program and, if she does succeed in entering the program, from successfully completing it.
154  She argued, secondly, that her exacerbations may prevent her from pursuing a career in teaching administration given the long working hours and the intensive periods of working at a computer that are expected of administrators. Both of these possible outcomes, should they occur, will significantly and adversely affect her future earning capacity.
155  In monetary terms, should Ms. Kilian fail to obtain her Master's degree as a result of her injury, she will incur a loss each year representing the difference between income at Scale 5 Plus and 6.
156  Ms. Kilian is currently at Step 3.6 on the school district's salary grid. It is expected that she will advance one step each year until reaching the highest step, which is Step 10, in 2018. Should Ms. Kilian achieve Scale 6, her annual salary increase when she reaches Step 10 would be in the amount of <damage type = "other">$1,618</damage>. Before Step 10, the incremental annual increase starts at <damage type = "other">$1,100</damage> per year at Step 3 and increases yearly until Step 10.
157  On average, a teacher works until age 62. Ms. Kilian testified that she intended to work until that age. She led expert actuarial evidence, based on both "risk" and "choice" contingencies, assuming that she would work until age 62 and would complete her Master's degree by 2014 but for her symptoms. At pay grade Scale 6, the cumulative present value of her salary to age 62 is <damage type = "other">$1,253,715</damage>. At pay grade Scale 5 Plus, the cumulative present value is <damage type = "other">$1,139,605</damage>. Assuming that Ms. Kilian never attains her Master's degree, the difference in present value terms is <damage type = "other">$114,110</damage>.
158  The actuarial evidence led at trial by the defendants, which I accept, established that the present value of <damage type = "other">$1,000</damage> in annual earnings to the age of 62 would be <damage type = "other">$21,095</damage>.
159  Ms. Kilian also argued that in the event she is not able to attain the Master's degree, she will not have the necessary qualifications to eventually apply for an administrative position. If she attained her Master's degree and, in five years' time successfully applied for a position as an elementary school principal, the present value of her future income loss would be two to three times higher than the loss she would incur as a teacher.
160  Moreover, said Ms. Kilian, even if she eventually attains her Master's degree, she may be incapable of performing the spectrum of duties of an administrator as a result of exacerbations of her neck pain.
161  The defendants argued that no damages should be awarded for the claim relating to the loss of opportunity to obtain the Master's degree. First, said the defendants, Ms. Kilian has not established that exacerbation of her neck pain will prevent her from obtaining her Master's degree.
162  Secondly, said the defendants, there is no evidence establishing that Ms. Kilian may succeed in obtaining an administrative position in the school district. The only evidence led by Ms. Kilian demonstrates that administrative positions are highly competitive and that a teacher must work as a classroom teacher for many, many years before even being considered competitive for such a position. Ms. Kilian's chances of ever obtaining an administrative position are remote. Even more remote, said the defendants, is the proposition that Ms. Kilian's accident-related injury may adversely affect her chances of obtaining an administrative position.
163  The defendants argued in the alternative that an award of one year's salary at <damage type = "other">$60,000</damage> would amply compensate Ms. Kilian for any future loss of income earning capacity and would in fact likely exceed any such loss she will experience.
Discussion
164  I accept that Ms. Kilian's accident-related injuries may affect her future income earning capacity as a teacher as a result of the occasional exacerbations of her neck pain. However, I do not accept that her income earning capacity will be affected to the extent she has argued.
165  First, I do not accept Dr. le Nobel's opinion that Ms. Kilian's symptoms may worsen, rather than improve, in the future. That opinion is based entirely on Ms. Kilian's account of the exacerbation in her neck pain in February 2011. It must be viewed together with Dr. le Nobel's observation in his report dated April 20, 2011 that Ms. Kilian was, at that time, teaching six blocks of physical education class. She was able to fully participate in the class, including demonstrating the spectrum of activities to the class. He observed that in February 2011, when she reported an exacerbation, she was able to teach all six blocks of physical education but "did not participate to the same level".
166  Further, Dr. le Nobel expressed the opinion that Ms. Kilian's condition may well improve in the future with an active physical rehabilitation program. She may not reach all of her pre-accident capabilities, he said, but did not specify which capabilities she may not achieve nor did he suggest that she will be unable to perform all normal activities of daily living or all of her job functions.
167  Second, the evidence of Ms. Kilian's functioning post-accident does not, in general terms, support the argument that the accident will prevent her from completing the Master's program. Only three months post accident, Ms. Kilian entered the graduate diploma program in addition to working in a .8 FTE teaching position. She participated in the program for the next two years. She not only completed the program, but completed it with excellent results. However, she was working four days per week and did not make herself available for TOC assignments on the fifth day, using that extra time to recuperate.
168  From late 2009 to late 2011, Ms. Kilian had two years during which she suffered some low-grade symptoms but very few exacerbations or intensification of her neck pain. I have earlier described the events leading to the exacerbations between August 2011 and June 2012.
169  While I accept there is a substantial likelihood that Ms. Kilian's neck symptoms may delay her ability to achieve her Master's degree, I do not accept that those symptoms will impair her ability to obtain an administrative position.
170  First, Ms. Kilian only recently began to consider the possibility of applying at some point in the future for such a position. Her focus has always been classroom teaching. It was not clear from the evidence whether she will opt to leave the classroom in the future.
171  Second, Ms. Gibbs, who has encouraged Ms. Kilian to consider administration at some point in the future, taught in the classroom for 25 years before she succeeded in obtaining an administrative position. Competition for such positions is fierce. Ms. Kilian has completed only two years as a continuing teacher in the school district. Although she has Ms. Gibbs' confidence, the evidence does not establish that such a career track is anything but a remote possibility. Even on Ms. Gibbs' evidence, it appears the chances of obtaining an administrative position are slight.
172  Third, and perhaps most importantly, the physical requirements of an administrative position do not differ significantly from those of the job Ms. Kilian currently performs. Nothing in the medical evidence led at trial established that Ms. Kilian's neck symptoms are any more likely to impair her ability to function as an administrator than they are to impair her ability to function as a Resource teacher.
173  However, I conclude there is a substantial likelihood that Ms. Kilian's mild chronic neck pain, and the occasional exacerbations of that neck pain, may interfere with her ability to achieve her Master's degree, but only in the immediate three to four years. If she does not succeed in gaining entry to the Master's program by 2013, she will be required to start at the beginning of a three-year program. If she does gain entry, she may encounter difficulties from time to time. However, given Ms. Kilian's past performance in the diploma program while teaching almost full-time, I conclude that she will most likely be capable of completing the Master's program once she is admitted.
174  On the basis of the medical evidence concerning future exacerbations to Ms. Kilian's neck symptoms, I conclude that an award of damages for loss of future income earning capacity should reflect a delay in achieving Scale 6 on the salary grid.
175  As observed by the Court in Marois v. Pelech,  [Marois], citing a series of earlier decisions of the Court, the fundamental principle concerning the assessment of the loss of future earning capacity is that a plaintiff is entitled to be put in the position he or she would have occupied but for the accident so far as money can achieve that end. Projections from past earnings may be a useful factor to consider in valuing the loss in appropriate cases, but they are not the only factor.
176  The task of the trial judge, said the Court in Marois, is to assess damages for the loss of impairment of future income earning capacity, not to calculate the loss of projected earnings according to some mathematical formula. Once the nature and extent of the impairment is established, it must be valued. The valuation may involve a comparison of the likely future of the plaintiff but for the accident with his or her likely future following the accident. The Court may determine the present value of the difference between the two, but that is not the end of the inquiry; it is the starting point only.
177  I have reviewed the case law cited by Ms. Kilian in support of her submission that the award under this head of damage ought to be in the range of <damage type = "other">$250,000</damage> (Watt v. Meier, ; Pham-Fraser). Both of those decisions involved teachers who suffered accident-related injuries and a consequent loss of future income earning capacity. In my respectful view, the severity of the injuries and general circumstances of the plaintiffs in each of those cases differed significantly from those in the present case.
178  In the result, taking into account all of the evidence, it is the overall fairness and reasonableness of the award that must be considered. The Court in Marois summarized the approach this way at para. 35, quoting Rosvold v. Dunlop, : "The assessment of damages is a matter of judgment, not calculation."
179  It is difficult to say with any degree of precision the amount of time it may take Ms. Kilian to complete her Master's degree, but that difficulty cannot preclude an assessment of the damages. In reaching a decision concerning this head of damage, I have considered the evidence concerning the difference between the cumulative present values of pay Scales 5 Plus and 6.. As noted earlier, the actuarial evidence established that if Ms. Kilian never achieved her Master's degree, the present value of the resulting loss to her (based on the difference in pay between the respective salary grids), would be <damage type = "other">$114,100</damage>.
180  The evidence does not support the argument that Ms. Kilian will never achieve her Master's degree, thus it does not support an award of damages of that magnitude. I conclude that an appropriate award reflecting a delay in achieving the Master's degree is <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$40,000</damage>.
181  In total, taking into account the award of <damage type = "sub-future wage loss">$30,000</damage> to replace future sick bank use, Ms. Kilian is entitled to an award of <damage type = "future wage loss">$70,000</damage> under this head of damage.
6. Cost of Future Care
182  In the recent decision of Gignac v. Insurance Corporation of British Columbia, , the Court of Appeal, citing Gregory v. Insurance Corporation of British Columbia, , observed that while it is not necessary that a physician testify to the medical necessity of each and every item of care claimed by a plaintiff when advancing a future cost of care claim, there must be some evidentiary link drawn between the physician's assessment of pain, disability and recommended treatment, and the care recommended by a qualified health care professional. Ms. Kilian's claim for future cost of care was based primarily on a report titled a Cost of Future Care Analysis prepared by Ms. Morin. The Analysis references the Physical Capacity Evaluation she conducted on Ms. Kilian in September 2011. On the basis of the PCE, Ms. Morin made a spectrum of recommendations, including ongoing attendance for massage therapy, sessions with a psychologist to address the management of her episodic but chronic pain, a workplace assessment, a supervised exercise program, assistance with housekeeping and yard maintenance, assistance with moving should she decide to sell her condominium and move to another home, a range of home fitness equipment to allow her to work out at home, and medication for future pain relief.
183  Dr. le Nobel testified that he concurred with Ms. Morin's recommendations for future care. His concurrence is based, in large part, on Ms. Kilian's report of ongoing episodic neck pain and the likelihood that she will continue to have such episodes from time to time in the future. Dr. le Noble did not address the items of care specifically.
184  I accept that Ms. Kilian is entitled to an award of damages which reflects the present value of costs she will likely incur to address her ongoing need to participate in an active rehabilitation program and other measures designed to maintain her conditioning and thereby minimize the exacerbations of her neck pain. For example, she currently receives massage therapy regularly, which both prevents her neck pain and provides relief during exacerbations. She also participates in a fitness program with a kinesiologist.
185  Accordingly, I accept those recommendations of Ms. Morin which are designed to address the occasional exacerbations of Ms. Morin's neck symptoms. I will deal specifically with the cost of those recommendations in due course.
186  I will first deal with the recommendations I do not accept.
187  In my respectful view, there is no evidentiary basis for an award of damages for loss of housekeeping capacity or assistance in homemaking and yard maintenance. The only evidence advanced in support of this aspect of Ms. Kilian's claim is the comment of Dr. le Nobel in his report dated March 14, 2012, that "[Ms. Kilian] reports the need for increased assistance at home with episodic neck and upper body pain from time to time." He did not specify the nature of the tasks she could not perform or the extent of the assistance she may require.
188  For the reasons stated earlier, I do not accept Ms. Morin's opinion concerning the extent of Ms. Kilian's physical limitations described in the PCE. The physical stamina testing exceeded to a significant extent the usual physical demands of Ms. Kilian's day-to-day life both at home and at work. Further, Ms. Kilian's own evidence concerning her actual day-to-day functioning does not support all of Ms. Morin's conclusions.
189  Ms. Kilian lived on her own for approximately two years following the accident. She did not seek any housekeeping assistance during that time, nor has she sought it at any time in the past four years. She did not suggest that she lacked the financial resources to hire a house cleaner for a few hours each week. Before cohabiting with Mr. Jones, she performed all housekeeping duties on her own, although she was not (in her words) the "neat freak" she had been prior to the accident. Ms. Kilian testified that even during her relationship with Mr. Jones, she performed the majority of the housework.
190  In light of the evidence concerning Ms. Kilian's past and current functioning in the home, I have concluded there is no evidentiary basis for an award of damages for future care in areas such as homemaking, child care or yard maintenance, nor is there a basis for an award for diminished housekeeping capacity.
191  Ms. Kilian made a claim for moving expenses which I conclude is too speculative. Ms. Kilian is not intending to move at present. Further, she will incur moving costs in any event should she decide to move at some point in the future.
192  As I have already noted, Ms. Kilian has performed well in her teaching job. In the year following the accident, she did not make herself available for TOC assignments, and spent less time at work before and after class. She was also careful in the first year when teaching her physical education classes. She has otherwise coped well with her teaching load, earning excellent teaching evaluations. Ms. Kilian also completed the graduate diploma while working a .8 FTE teaching job.
193  For the most part, Ms. Kilian manages her neck symptoms with stretching, yoga, and massage therapy. Those symptoms become acute only during the occasional exacerbations. I conclude that an award of damages for cost of future care should be based on what is reasonably necessary to assist Ms. Kilian to maintain her general fitness and conditioning and to alleviate her symptoms when they become acute during exacerbations.
194  The defendants acknowledged that an award representing the present cost of some aspects of future care is appropriate based on Ms. Kilian's current condition and the chances of sporadic exacerbations of her condition in the future.
195  The present cost of the recommendations of Ms. Morin were calculated in the actuarial report of Christiane Clark (Associated Economic Consultants Inc.). On the basis of Ms. Clark's report, the recommendations of Ms. Morin and the opinion of Dr. le Noble, I conclude that Ms. Kilian is entitled to the following amounts:
a work site assessment to determine whether there are measures available to assist Ms. Kilian during exacerbations of her neck pain: <damage type = "sub-future care">$600</damage>;
multi-adjustable chair with armrests/neck support: <damage type = "sub-future care">$1,670</damage>;
Physiotherapy services (4 hours to design an active rehabilitation program): <damage type = "sub-future care">$720</damage>;
Home exercise equipment to assist with an active rehabilitation program (exercise mat; basic weight set; recumbent stationary bike; exercise ball); and ancillary equipment and aids such as cold packs, heating pad, cervical pillow, and "TENS machine" (present value): <damage type = "sub-future care">$4,775</damage>;
The assistance of a psychologist who specializes in pain management (15 sessions): <damage type = "sub-future care">$2,580</damage>;
Occupational therapy (one year): <damage type = "sub-future care">$1,015</damage>;
Massage therapy (initial two years); <damage type = "sub-future care">$2,600</damage>;
Massage therapy (subsequent years) (present value): <damage type = "sub-future care">$6,000</damage>;
Non-prescription medications (present value): <damage type = "sub-future care">$3,200</damage>;
Prescription medication (Dilaudid) (present value): <damage type = "sub-future care">$3,575</damage>.
196  Ms. Kilian is currently participating in a funded kinesiology program. There was no evidence to suggest that such a program should continue indefinitely. Accordingly no award has been made for the cost of that program.
197  The total award for future cost of care is <damage type = "future care">$26,735</damage>.
7. Special Damages
198  The parties have agreed that the total of Ms. Kilian's current out-of-pocket expenses for treatment, medication, supplies and parking for various appointments is <damage type = "sub-special">$5,300</damage>. In addition, I accept Ms. Kilian's mileage expense calculation of <damage type = "sub-special">$872</damage> (based on a total travel distance of 1,744 at <damage type = "other">$0.50</damage> per kilometer). Accordingly, the total award for special damages is <damage type = "special">$6,172</damage>.
8. General
Deductibility of Collateral Benefits
199  I accept that the disability benefits accruing to Ms. Kilian pursuant to the collective agreement between her union and her employer are not subject to deduction: Cunningham v. Wheeler, ; Kask v. Tam  (C.A.). The evidence (including agreement between counsel, pay stubs, Blue Cross documents, the collective agreement) provides ample proof that the benefits form part of Ms. Kilian's overall compensation package.
Mitigation
200  The defendants took the position at the outset of the trial that Ms. Kilian failed to fully mitigate her loss because she did not engage in an active rehabilitation program in 2010 when it was recommended by Dr. le Noble. That position was not vigorously pursued during the trial, nor was it pursued in final argument. In any event, I do not accept that Ms. Kilian failed to fully mitigate her loss. It was not until April 2011 that Dr. le Noble mentioned the benefit of an exercise-based rehabilitation program to help Ms. Kilian return to activities such as golf and kayaking (as distinct from her general functioning). The defendants provided no medical or other evidence to support the argument that earlier attendance at the kinesiology appointments would have lessened the exacerbations in her neck pain which she experienced in 2011-2012.
V. SUMMARY OF DAMAGES AWARDS
201  In summary, Ms. Kilian is entitled to the following damages awards:
 (a) Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$75,000</damage> 
 (b) Past wage loss: <damage type = "past wage loss">$15,682</damage> 
Loss of future income <damage type = "future wage loss">$70,000</damage> earning capacity:
 (d) Cost of future care: <damage type = "future care">$26,735</damage> 
 (e) Special damages: <damage type = "special">$6,172</damage> 
 TOTAL: <damage type = "total">$193,589</damage> 
202  I will leave to counsel for the parties all precise calculations on these amounts, including HST where appropriate, and income tax and other deductions where appropriate.
203  Subject to further submissions by the parties, Ms. Kilian is entitled to her taxable costs and court ordered interest.
C.A. WEDGE J.
End of Document
Cox v. Bounthavilay, [2007] B.C.J. No. 1776
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
Baker J.
Heard: February 1 and 2, 2007.
Judgment: August 10, 2007.
Vancouver Registry No. M051147
[2007] B.C.J. No. 1776   |   2007 BCSC 1199   |   160 A.C.W.S. (3d) 796
Between Chad Thomas Cox, Plaintiff, and Bounthieng Bounthavilay and Lom Bounthavilay, Defendants
(34 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — General damages — Non-pecuniary damages, including pain and suffering — Plaintiff who sustained soft-tissue injuries in motor vehicle accident, largely resolved within one year, awarded $20,000 for pain, suffering and loss of enjoyment of life.
Damages — Physical injuries — Body injuries — Non-pecuniary award — $5,001 to $20,000 — Plaintiff who sustained soft-tissue injuries in motor vehicle accident, largely resolved within one year, awarded $20,000 for pain, suffering and loss of enjoyment of life.
Tort law — Negligence — Motor vehicles — Liability of driver — Rules of the road — Driver proceeding straight through intersection in lane intended for left turns negligent and solely responsible for collision with driver turning left into intersection who had been waved into intersection by other drivers — Motor Vehicle Act, ss. 144, 175, 186.
Transportation law — Motor vehicles — Traffic regulation — Turning — Driver proceeding straight through intersection in lane intended for left turns negligent and solely responsible for collision with driver turning left into intersection who had been waved into intersection by other drivers.
Action by Cox against Bounthavilay for damages for personal injuries sustained in June 2004 motor vehicle accident -- Cox traveling southbound, intending to make left turn at intersection where he faced stop sign -- Bounthavilay traveling westbound on cross street -- Road conditions were wet but not slippery -- Cox claimed he waited at stop sign, noting there was significant traffic in front of him but that vehicles were not blocking intersection -- Cox assumed there was accident causing traffic to be backed up -- Cox claimed he made eye contact with drivers stuck in traffic before him, who waved him into intersection -- Cox could not see traffic in all lanes he had to cross to make left turn -- While making turn, Cox saw Bounthavilay's vehicle approaching from east, and braced for impact -- Bounthavilay testified she was hurrying but not speeding -- Testified she noticed other vehicles traveling slowly through intersection -- Admitted she proceeded through intersection straight in lane intended for left turns -- Testified she did not see Cox's vehicle prior to impact, but claimed she braked prior to impact -- Some other discrepancies in Bounthavilay's evidence in examination for discovery and at trial -- Cox gave evidence he was wearing seatbelt at time of impact -- Both front airbags deployed on impact -- Cox suffered sore chest and had difficulty breathing after impact -- Instantly noticed headache, stiff neck and abdominal muscle pull -- Was taken by ambulance to hospital -- Claimed his chest and abdominal pain continued for few months after accident, then resolved completely -- Claimed he left arm was bruised and sore form one month -- Claimed his right knee swelled, which took six months to subside -- Claimed his neck, back and shoulder pain continued to date of trial to some degree -- Claimed he missed four days of work because of accident -- Cox' family physician testified Cox's accident related problems largely resolved within one year of accident -- Acupuncturist noted possibility of accelerated degenerative changes from Cox's soft tissue injuries -- HELD: Action allowed -- Bounthavilay was negligent in proceeding through intersection in lane designated for left turns without slowing or stopping her vehicle to ascertain if other vehicles had stopped to permit another vehicle to cross lanes -- Bounthavilay failed to maintain proper lookout, and should have yielded right of way to Cox -- Bounthavilay's negligence was sole cause of accident -- Cox suffered mild soft tissue injuries, largely resolved by end of 2005 -- Injuries not debilitating and did not prevent Cox from working or doing other activities -- Speculation about possible degenerative changes resulting from accident was nothing more than that -- Cox was relatively stoic and did his best to recover from injuries -- Cox awarded <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$20,000</damage> for pain, suffering and loss of enjoyment of life -- Cox also entitled to damages of <damage type = "past wage loss">$855</damage> for lost work time, <damage type = "special">$1,319</damage> for special damages, and <damage type = "sub-special">$300</damage> for deductible paid in relations to damage to his car.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Motor Vehicle Act, , s. 175, s. 186
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: Gregory E. Calder.
Counsel for the Defendants: Jonathan Simon.
BAKER J.
1   On June 7, 2004, the plaintiff's Honda Civic automobile collided with the Toyota Camry automobile driven by the defendant Bounthieng Bounthavilay, ("Mrs. Bounthavilay") at the intersection of 96th Avenue and 136A Street in Surrey, British Columbia. The plaintiff suffered soft tissue injuries as a result of the collision. He alleges that the negligence of the defendant Mrs. Bounthavilay caused the accident. Mrs. Bounthavilay alleges that Mr. Cox's own negligence was the primary or a contributing cause of the collision.
FACTS
2  At approximately 8:00 a.m. on the day of the accident, Mr. Cox was southbound on 136A Street. He intended to make a left-hand turn at the intersection of 136A and 96th Avenue. 96th Avenue is a major through street. There is a stop sign on 136A Street for traffic south or northbound, intending to cross or enter the intersection.
3  Mrs. Bounthavilay was westbound on 96th Avenue. At the point where the two streets intersect, 96th Avenue has three westbound lanes and two eastbound lanes. The westbound lane furthest to the left and nearest to the centre line has left turn arrows marked on the roadway east of 136A Street, indicating that it is a left turn lane for traffic intending to turn left at 136A Street. A left turn there leads into the entry of Surrey Memorial Hospital. Although the arrow indicates a left turn only, rather than a left turning arrow and an arrow pointing straight, the left turn lane does not terminate at the intersection of 96th Avenue and 136A Street, but continues through the intersection and terminates at the next intersection, which is the intersection of 96th Avenue and the King George Highway.
4  On the day of the accident, the roads were wet from an earlier shower, but it was not raining and it was daylight. Mr. Cox was heading for a medical appointment for the purpose of having his right knee x-rayed.
5  Mr. Cox testified that when he stopped at the stop sign at the intersection, he noticed that there were emergency vehicles at the intersection of 96th Avenue and King George Highway. He saw what he described as "a wall" of traffic to his right and to his left, but these vehicles were not blocking the intersection. He surmised that there had been an accident at the intersection of 96th Avenue and King George Highway. The traffic in the two through westbound lanes on 96th Avenue was backed up as far as he could see to his left.
6  Mr. Cox testified that he waited at the stop sign until he had made eye contact with the drivers of the vehicles in the two westbound lanes of 96th Avenue immediately to his left, and until those drivers had indicated through the use of hand signals that he should proceed to cross those lanes in front of them. At the point at which he was stopped, he could not see into the westbound left turn lane. He pulled forward across the westbound curb lane, stopped, and then crossed the westbound centre lane and stopped in front of the westbound vehicle in that lane. From this position, Mr. Cox could see into the left-hand turn lane and he saw no westbound traffic approaching in that lane. However, from this position he was unable to see if there was traffic approaching in the eastbound lanes of 96th Avenue, which he also needed to cross. He therefore pulled forward part way into the westbound turn lane, stopped and looked to the east. He saw traffic approaching from the east, so remained where he was. When he looked back to the left he saw the defendant's vehicle approaching. He thought it would stop, but realized that the defendant's vehicle was not slowing, and he braced for the impact that occurred. Photographs of the vehicle damage suggest that the front of Mrs. Bounthavilay's vehicle struck the front left side of Mr. Cox's vehicle.
7  Mrs. Bounthavilay testified that she was on her way to work and was following the route she takes each morning. As I stated earlier, she was westbound on 96th Avenue. She intended to drive through the intersection of 96th Avenue and 136A Street, and to make a left-hand turn at the next intersection which is the intersection of 96th Avenue and King George Highway. She had been travelling in the middle of the three lanes of westbound traffic. When she was about five metres from the intersection with 136A Street, she pulled out from behind the vehicles ahead of her in the middle lane, and into the left-hand turn lane. She testified that she often did this before the intersection with 136A, even though she did not intend to turn left there.
8  Ms. Bounthavilay testified that although she did not start work until 8:45, she was in a hurry to get to her workplace because there is limited parking and she wanted to get a parking space before the spaces were all filled. She agreed with the testimony of Mr. Cox that the traffic heading westbound was slow. She recalls that two other vehicles moved from the middle lane into the left turn lane ahead of her, but agreed in cross-examination that those two cars had already passed through the intersection at 136A before the collision occurred. It is clear they had already passed through before Mr. Cox pulled ahead of the second lane of westbound vehicles. She testified that she was travelling at a speed of about 55 kph as she changed lanes and proceeded into the intersection.
9  Ms. Bounthavilay testified in direct examination that after she moved into the left turn lane, the vehicles in the middle lane ahead of and beside her were moving ahead slowly. In cross-examination, she agreed that the vehicles in the through lanes westbound were stopped just before she got to 136A Street. Later in her cross-examination, she agreed that she's not sure whether the vehicles in the lane to her right were moving or not because she wasn't paying attention to those vehicles.
10  Ms. Bounthavilay was referred to answers she had given on her examination for discovery. She testified on discovery that all the westbound traffic was moving at about 55 to 60 kph. It is not possible to reconcile this evidence and I must conclude that Ms. Bounthavilay either did not notice, or cannot recall what was occurring in the lane she had vacated. I am satisfied that the vehicles in the lane she left, and the lane to the right of that lane, were stopped when she moved into the left turn lane. By this time, Mr. Cox's vehicle was in the intersection and would have impeded any forward movement by vehicles in the through lanes. The inference I draw from this is that Ms. Bounthavilay likely changed lanes because the vehicles in the middle lane ahead of her had come to a stop and she did not want to wait for those vehicles to move through the intersection before turning into the lane she would need eventually to enter in order to turn left when she reached the King George Highway intersection.
11  Ms. Bounthavilay's evidence about whether Mr. Cox's vehicle was moving when she struck it is also unclear. Although she said she did not see his vehicle until the moment of impact, she also testified that she braked prior to impact, which suggests she did see the Cox vehicle prior to impact. Mr. Cox noted no change in her speed prior to impact, and I consider it more probable than not, that she did not brake before the collision, and that she did not notice Mr. Cox's vehicle until immediately before the collision.
12  Ms. Bounthavilay testified that she usually moves into the left turn lane before she reaches the intersection with 136A Street, even though she does not intend to turn left there. Ms. Bounthavilay also agrees that she had her left turn signal on as she was approaching 136A Street, although she did not intend to turn left until she reached King George Highway. Ms. Bounthavilay agreed that she knew that cars sometimes crossed 96th Avenue at the intersection with 136A Street and she had seen cars do so before that day.
13  In direct, Ms. Bounthavilay testified that Mr. Cox's vehicle was only one metre ahead of her when she first saw him, and that his car was about one metre into her lane. She recalls that his vehicle was moving when she first saw it. She testified that when she saw him, she was too close to avoid the accident. In cross- examination, she testified that the first time she saw Mr. Cox's vehicle was when she hit it. I consider it more probable than not that Mr. Cox's vehicle had come to a complete stop prior to the impact and that Ms. Bounthavilay changed lanes when she was so close to the intersection, and to Mr. Cox's vehicle, that she could not avoid the collision.
14  The parties rely on s. 144 of the Motor Vehicle Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 318, which provides:
A person must not drive a motor vehicle on a highway
without due care and attention, ...
at a speed that is excessive relative to the road, traffic, visibility or weather conditions.
15  Section 175 of the Act provides:
If a vehicle that is about to enter a through highway has stopped in compliance with section 196,
the driver of the vehicle must yield the right of way to traffic that has entered the intersection on the through highway or is approaching so closely on it that it constitutes an immediate hazard, and
having yielded, the driver may proceed with caution.
If a vehicle is entering a through highway in compliance with subsection (1), traffic approaching the intersection on the highway must yield the right of way to the entering vehicle while it is proceeding into or across the highway.
16  Section 186 provides:
Except when a peace officer directs otherwise, if there is a stop sign at an intersection, a driver of a vehicle must stop
at the marked stop line, if any,
before entering the marked crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or
when there is neither a marked crosswalk nor a stop line, before entering the intersection, at the point nearest the intersecting highway from which the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting highway.
17  Counsel provided the Court with helpful authorities. The decision of Justice Taylor in Toribio (Committee of) v. Cook,  was of particular assistance. I carefully considered the decision of Justice Clancy in Cossalter v. Roque, . In that case, however, the facts were quite different. The Court concluded that the driver in a position similar to that of Mr. Cox had either not observed oncoming vehicles, or had paid no attention to their significance.
18  I am satisfied that Ms. Bounthavilay was negligent in proceeding straight through the intersection in a lane designated for left turns without slowing or stopping her vehicle in order to ascertain if the vehicles in the lanes to her right were stopped to allow a vehicle to cross 96th Avenue, particularly when she had changed lanes so close to the intersection, and given the clear marking on the roadway indicating that the lane into which she had moved was marked for left turns at 136A Street. I find that although she was not speeding, or was driving only slightly above the speed limit, her speed of travel as she approached and proceeded through the intersection in the left turn lane was nevertheless excessive in the prevailing circumstances. She failed to maintain a proper lookout for vehicles crossing the intersection after she moved into the left turn lane. Mr. Cox had brought his vehicle to a stop as he was required to do and had proceeded with caution into Ms. Bounthavilay's lane at a time when it was safe for him to do so. When Ms. Bounthavilay's vehicle entered that lane, Mr. Cox's vehicle had proceeded cautiously into the lane. Ms. Bounthavilay should have yielded the right of way to Mr. Cox's vehicle at that point.
19  I conclude that Ms. Bounthavilay's vehicle was not an immediate hazard when Mr. Cox pulled forward into the third westbound lane because she had not yet changed from the middle lane into the left lane. I conclude that Mrs. Bounthavilay's negligence was the sole cause of the accident and that Mr. Cox was not contributorily negligent.
DAMAGES
20  Mr. Cox was wearing his seatbelt. At the moment of impact, he felt his body swing sideways and he recalls hitting his left ear on the airbag or left side window. Both the driver's and front passenger seat airbags deployed and he felt himself pushed to the right. Mr. Cox believes his right knee struck the dashboard of the vehicle, or under the dashboard, but I consider this improbable given the deployment of the airbags. It is more likely that the knee came into contact with the airbag, or was stressed by the action of bracing for the impact.
21  Mr. Cox's chest was sore and he was having some difficulty breathing when he got out of his vehicle. He testified that he instantly had a headache and a stiff neck, and felt like he had pulled a muscle in his abdomen. He walked to the roadside and sat down. He was taken to the nearby hospital by ambulance and checked in the emergency department. His right knee and chest were x-rayed, medication was prescribed and he was discharged and advised to see his family physician.
22  Mr. Cox testified that he had chest and abdominal pain for a few months after the accident, but both then resolved completely. His left forearm was bruised and felt tender and painful for about one month, and then resolved completely. He testified that his right knee swelled up and that it took about six months for his knee to return to its pre-accident state.
23  Mr. Cox testified that he experienced neck, shoulder and back pain following the accident. He testified that the pain on the left side of his neck resolved in a year and has not recurred, but that he still has stiffness and discomfort on the right side of his neck extending into his right shoulder. Mr. Cox testified he initially had pain in his entire back, but that the upper back pain resolved by about a year after the accident. He continued to have some stiffness and pain in his lower back on the right side only.
24  Mr. Cox testified that he did not go to work for four days after the accident, but then returned to work and has not missed any work due to his injuries since that time.
25  Dr. Tom Iwama has been Mr. Cox's family physician since March 2003. He prepared a medical-legal report for use in this litigation. Dr. Iwama recorded having seen Mr. Cox in May 2004, before the accident, for a complaint of pain in the right knee resulting from an injury sustained while playing baseball. The pain recurred, and Dr. Iwama referred Mr. Cox to Dr. Tim King who saw Mr. Cox on June 3, 2004, four days before the accident that is the subject of this litigation. Dr. King apparently diagnosed a possible right medial meniscal tear. An MRI done on August 20, 2004 showed a lateral meniscal tear. I am satisfied that this tear was not caused by the accident and was a pre-existing condition. The accident probably did increase the discomfort resulting from the pre-existing condition for a period of some months.
26  Dr. Iwama recorded complaints of neck, back and chest pain and tenderness five days after the accident, but by June 26 and thereafter, no further complaints of chest pain were recorded by Dr. Iwama. On subsequent visits up to and including November 22, 2005, Dr. Iwama recorded complaints of stiffness of the neck, back and right shoulder. On November 22, 2005, Dr. Iwama recorded only a complaint of persistent soreness of the right shoulder, for which he prescribed an anti-inflammatory.
27  After that date, Dr. Iwama noted that although he saw Mr. Cox for other unrelated medical issues, he made no notations regarding symptoms from injuries received in the motor vehicle accident. I infer from this that Mr. Cox was reporting no further symptoms, or that any symptoms were so mild that Dr. Iwama considered them too insignificant to record. I conclude that by November 2005, any residual discomfort from the accident injuries was so mild that Mr. Cox was no longer seeking medical advice or treatment form Dr. Iwama in regard to the symptoms.
28  Dr. Iwama asked Mr. Cox to come in for a further consultation on September 16, 2006. Mr. Cox reported on this date that he still experienced low back tightness flaring up in the morning, and that his right shoulder still felt tight and sore in the morning when he had been working. Dr. Iwama stated in his report that, "There is a distinct possibility that (Mr. Cox) may have a chronic problem in the muscular system of the back and shoulder." This possibility was not elevated to a probability.
29  Mr. Cox was also seen by Dr. Mark Frobb for acupuncture treatments and went for massage therapy and physiotherapy on September 3 and 8, 2004 and March 29 and April 2, 2005. By that time, Dr. Frobb noted that Mr. Cox's low back and neck had improved and that his main problem was his right shoulder. After a visit on April 6, 2005, Mr. Cox did not return to Dr. Frobb for treatment until December 15, 2005. He saw Dr. Frobb three times in December, and twice in January 2006, and then not again until one visit on September 25, 2006. Dr. Frobb asked to see Mr. Cox in January 2007, because he had been asked to give evidence in this trial.
30  Dr. Frobb speculated about the possibility that the soft tissue injuries could lead to accelerated degenerative changes in Mr. Cox's spine, but in my view, this speculation is insufficient to establish this as a compensable matter. I conclude that Mr. Cox suffered mild soft tissue bruising to his chest and left arm that resolved soon after the accident, and mild to moderate soft tissue injuries to his neck, right shoulder and back that had largely resolved by the end of 2005. Aside from the first few days after the accident, these injuries were not debilitating and did not prevent Mr. Cox from carrying out his work duties or other life activities, even though his job involves considerable physical effort and exertion. He makes no claim for future income loss or future cost of care and no entitlement to damages under those heads of damage has been established.
31  Mr. Cox is entitled to recover the sum of <damage type = "past wage loss">$855</damage> for past loss of income for the four days of missed work. I award the sum of <damage type = "special">$1,318.89</damage> for special damages, and a further <damage type = "sub-special">$300</damage> for the deductible paid in relation to damage to the motor vehicle Mr. Cox was driving.
32  Mr. Cox has experienced discomfort at work and morning pain, stiffness, tight muscles and discomfort following some work shifts. I conclude that these symptoms had largely resolved by the end of 2005, with only occasional episodes after that date of a relatively mild nature. Mr. Cox was experiencing right knee pain from an earlier injury before the accident that was exacerbated for a period of some months, but then resolved to his pre-accident state. Massage treatments and acupuncture provided considerable relief for the symptoms of neck, back and shoulder pain.
33  I have considered the authorities relied on by counsel for both parties. Counsel agree the range of damages indicated in these authorities is from <damage type = "other">$10,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$35,000</damage>, with the bulk of awards for similar injuries to similar plaintiffs falling in the range of <damage type = "other">$15,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$25,000</damage>. Mr. Cox is a relatively stoic plaintiff, who has done his best to recover from his injuries and has largely succeeded in doing so. I award Mr. Cox the sum of <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$20,000</damage> for pain suffering and loss of the enjoyment of life due to pain caused by his injuries.
34  Counsel asked that I defer consideration of the issue of costs. If the parties are unable to agree on a disposition of costs, they may arrange with the Registry to return to make further oral submissions, or they may submit written submissions about costs for my consideration.
BAKER J.
End of Document
Blackburn v. British Columbia, [2001] B.C.J. No. 1647
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Prince George, British Columbia
Meiklem J.
Heard: April 9 - 12, 2001.
Judgment: July 24, 2001.
Prince George Registry No. 07228
[2001] B.C.J. No. 1647   |   2001 BCSC 1076   |   107 A.C.W.S. (3d) 419
Between Tracy Idelle Blackburn, plaintiff, and Her Majesty the Queen Royal in Right of the Province of British Columbia, Royal Canadian Mounted Police and Leslie M. Leyh, defendants
(35 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Mitigation — In tort — Personal injuries, treatment for — Torts — Negligence — Standard of care, particular persons and relationships — Police officers — Motor vehicle, standard of care of driver — Keeping a proper lookout — Emergencies — Circumstances requiring caution or extreme caution — Emergency or police vehicles — Defences — Contributory negligence — Apportionment of fault.
Action by Blackburn for damages for injuries suffered when her vehicle collided with a police car at an intersection. Constable Leyh was on his way to another accident and was proceeding through the intersection with his lights and siren activated. He slowed down as he approached the intersection and began speeding up half-way through it. Blackburn was a hearing impaired 17-year-old driver who was completely deaf without her hearing aids. Although she was wearing her hearing aids, witnesses stated that her radio was playing loudly. Blackburn did not hear the siren at all. Several vehicles in the lane next to Blackburn's lane had stopped at the green light. Blackburn proceeded through the intersection on the green light and was struck by the police car proceeding through the intersection on the red light. Constable Leyh had stopped at his home for his rain coat prior to leaving for the scene of the accident. As a result of the collision, Blackburn suffered a moderately severe cervical sprain and post-traumatic stress. However, she failed to follow the recommended course of treatment. 

HELD: Action allowed in part.
 Constable Leyh took a calculated risk that was not proportionate to the urgency of the situation. The amount of time consumed by retrieving his raincoat was much greater than the few seconds that would have been consumed by momentarily delaying his acceleration. Speeding up where there was still a risk of a vehicle approaching was not justified by the urgency of the situation. Blackburn failed to observe that traffic in the lane next to her had stopped at the green light and did not reduce her speed or exercise appropriate caution as she approached the intersection. Visual attentiveness took on an added importance in respect of a deaf person driving a car. Blackburn should have paid special attention to visual clues and should not have had the volume of her radio turned up loudly. Fault for the accident was apportioned 80 per cent to Blackburn and 20 percent to Constable Leyh. Taking into account Blackburn's failure to mitigate her damages, her non-pecuniary losses were assessed at <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$30,000</damage> subject to the liability apportionment.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Motor Vehicle Act, s. 122(1), 122(4).
Police Act, s. 21.
Counsel
D. Byl and S. Moldowan, for the plaintiff. J.C. LeBlond, for the defendants.
MEIKLEM J.
1   The main issue in this case is determining liability for an intersection collision between a police vehicle with lights and siren activated and a 1985 Toyota driven by the hearing-impaired plaintiff proceeding on a green light.
2  The accident occurred at approximately 4 p.m. on June 13, 1996 at the intersection of Highway 16 West and Ferry Avenue. Ms. Blackburn was travelling northward on Ferry Avenue in the lane closest to the curb and sidewalk. At that point on Ferry Avenue there are two lanes for northward through traffic and two left-turn lanes for traffic turning westward on Highway 16. (There is also a right-turn lane.)
3  R.C.M.P. Cst. Leyh (now Corporal) was proceeding eastward on Highway 16, responding to a radio dispatch to a vehicle roll-over with injuries on Highway 97 south of Prince George. The highway lane configuration as he approached Ferry Avenue was four lanes, including a left-turn lane and a right-turn lane and two through lanes. He approached the intersection in the left or "fast" lane of the two through lanes, and then moved into the empty left-turn lane to get around vehicles stopped in the through lanes by the red light.
4  As he arrived at the intersection in the left-turn lane, Cst. Leyh stopped or slowed to a "slight creep" while some vehicles, northbound on Ferry Avenue and turning left onto Highway 16 West in front of him, completed their turns and there were no others in the intersection. He noted that southbound traffic on Ferry Avenue stopped for him, and the northbound through traffic in the "fast" through lane on Ferry Avenue made no attempt to enter the intersection. There were a considerable number of vehicles in both northbound left-turn lanes on Ferry Avenue, including trucks.
5  Cst. Leyh "felt" there was no one coming northbound on Ferry in the "slow" through lane, because he did not see any movement or threat in that lane, but he acknowledged that his view of that lane was obscured by the traffic stopped in the other three lanes. He proceeded slowly into the intersection, against the red light, angling back across toward the right or outside eastbound lane on Highway 16, and accelerated once he was in the intersection. He caught a glimpse of the plaintiff's car a split second before impact, and noted it to be travelling at approximately the 50 kph speed limit. He estimated his own speed at 15 kph at the time of impact, which occurred where the outside eastbound lane of Highway 16 meets the outside northbound lane of Ferry Avenue. He did not have time to apply his brakes or take evasive action.
6  After the impact, both cars moved in a north-easterly direction and the police car collided with a Chevrolet Suburban stopped westbound on Highway 16, causing a fire which engulfed both vehicles. The plaintiff's car collided with a pickup stopped behind the Suburban.
7  The plaintiff is completely deaf without the benefit of hearing aids. She says that she can generally hear a police car siren if she is wearing her hearing aids and if the siren is within two car lengths. On this occasion she was wearing her hearing aids, but, according to independent witnesses, her radio or cassette player was playing quite loudly. She did not hear the siren at all.
8  The plaintiff was driving home after visiting a friend. She was 17 years old and had been licensed to drive for about two months. She said that she was driving at 30 to 50 kph through the nearby school zone on Ferry Avenue and noted the traffic light at the intersection turn green when she was midway between two baseball diamonds on her right. Admissions of fact place the backstop of these diamonds at 400 meters and 250 meters respectively from the edge of the intersection. She recalls there were vehicles proceeding northward ahead of her, but in light of the testimony of the defendant as to his actions, which is largely corroborated by the independent witnesses, any such vehicles must have been a considerable distance ahead of her. Mr. Belbeck, the driver of the pickup that Ms. Blackburn's car later collided with, observed no other traffic moving into the intersection, yet said he saw the inevitability of the collision that did occur when he saw Ms. Blackburn's car some 3 to 4 car lengths south of the intersection approaching at a "normal" speed, and the police car accelerating through the intersection.
9  Shelly Wood was the driver of a car stationary in the "fast" northbound lane, about six cars from the front of that line. She remained stationary after the light controlling through traffic turned green because she heard the siren. The other cars in her lane also remained stopped. She noted Ms. Blackburn's car going past her in the lane to her right and actually vocalized "you idiot" in conjunction with mentally questioning why that car was going through when a whole line of cars remained stationary at the green light. She also said there were no other cars in the outside lane ahead of Ms. Blackburn.
10  On these facts, Ms. Blackburn seeks a finding of 75% fault against the defendant, and the defendant seeks a dismissal or a finding of no greater than 10% fault.
11  It is acknowledged that Cst. Leyh's vehicle was being operated in the discharge of his duty as a peace officer and was therefore an "emergency vehicle" within the definition in the Motor Vehicle Act. Therefore, he had the privileges afforded by s. 122(1) of the Act to proceed past a red traffic control signal without stopping and to disregard rules and traffic control devices governing direction of movement. These statutory privileges are qualified by s. 122(4), which reads as follows:
The driver of an emergency vehicle exercising a privilege granted by subsection (1) must drive with due regard for safety, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, including the following:
the nature, condition and use of the highway;
the amount of traffic that is on, or might reasonably be expected to be on, the highway;
the nature of the use being made of the emergency vehicle at the time.
12  The case law establishes that subsection (4)(c) introduces a balance between the urgency of the duty to which the emergency vehicle driver is responding and the risks inherent in the manner in which he or she drives against the rules in exercise of the statutory privilege. In other words, if the urgency is great, riskier driving is justified. [See Whitehead v. City of Victoria and Ball (1957), 25 W.W.R. 91 (B.C.C.A.) (emergency vehicle driver held 25% at fault); Sinclair et al v. Siddle (1965), 53 W.W.R. 14 (B.C.C.A.) (emergency vehicle driver held 25% at fault) ; Krauss v. Vancouver (City) et al (1964) 47 W.W.R. 364 (B.C.C.A.) (emergency vehicle driver held blameless on appeal).]
13  In this case, the police constable himself assigned the urgency to the request for his attendance at the roll-over accident as a Code 3, requiring the use of siren and flashing lights. This was within his duties and standard practice. Plaintiff's counsel suggested that the urgency was not properly considered great because Cst. Leyh acknowledged that he stopped by his home to pick up his yellow mackinaw after he received the dispatch. The officer's response was that he would have been useless at the roll-over scene without his proper equipment, and his house just happened to be nearby when he received the dispatch.
14  Clearly, however, the amount of time consumed in that action was much greater than the very few seconds that would have been consumed by momentarily delaying his acceleration through the intersection where the collision occurred until he had a view down the obscured outside lane or at least had advanced the front of his vehicle so that it would be visible to traffic moving in that lane. It is difficult therefore to conclude that speeding up when there was still a risk of a vehicle approaching in that obscured lane was justified by the urgency he perceived in the particular duty he was discharging.
15  I find that Cst. Leyh, similar to the defendant in Sinclair v. Siddle, supra, took a calculated risk that was not proportionate to the urgency and cannot be said to have complied with s. 122(4) of the Motor Vehicle Act in all the circumstances.
16  The negligence of Ms. Blackburn is plain. She failed to observe that traffic in the inside through lane remained stopped and did not respond to the green light, even though, according to her testimony, and the admissions regarding distance, she was driving toward the green light for approximately 325 meters.
17  She did not reduce her speed or exercise appropriate caution as she approached the intersection and she had the volume of her radio or cassette player turned up very loudly, which impeded her already significantly impaired ability to hear sirens.
18  There is a certain subjectivity to the reasonable person test when physical disabilities are present. It is not negligent for a deaf person not to hear a siren. But a deaf person driving a car must reasonably be aware that their own safety and the safety of other motorists might be affected by that disability if reasonable compensations are not made. Visual attentiveness takes on added importance.
19  In my view, it is incumbent upon a driver with a known profound hearing impairment to compensate for the obvious inherent risks of not being able to hear emergency vehicles sirens by learning to pay special attention to visual clues of the presence of an emergency vehicle, such as vehicles stopping or not proceeding on a green light. This is not requiring a higher standard of care of deaf persons, but rather requiring a specific component of reasonable care in specific circumstances.
20  In apportioning fault between the plaintiff and the defendant, I have the decisions cited above for comparison and guidance, as well as Vallery v. Po  (B.C.S.C.) (emergency vehicle driver 65% at fault);Wallace v. Canada (Attorney General), , Harford v. Grace,  (emergency vehicle driver 30% at fault); Smith v. Victoria (City) Police Department,  (emergency vehicle driver 30% at fault); Lal v. Lawson,  (emergency vehicle driver held blameless). In my view the appropriate apportionment of fault in this case is 80% to the plaintiff and 20% to the defendant.
21  By virtue of s. 21 of the Police Act, action does not lie against Cst. Leyh personally, but his employer is not absolved from vicarious liability.
22  Turning to damages, it was agreed that the vehicle damage was <damage type = "other">$3,000.00</damage>.
23  Ms. Blackburn was assisted from her vehicle and was able to walk. She had small abrasions on her neck and hip from her seat belt. She was taken to hospital in an ambulance and x-rayed. There was no evidence of fracture or subluxation. She was released after examination and attended her family physician the following day, complaining of headaches and a stiff, sore neck. Dr. Bond noted tiny lacerations on her temple and her hands and knee bruising. The range of motion of her neck was flexion 25%, extension 50%, rotation 50%. Dr. Bond diagnosed moderately severe cervical sprain or grade II Whiplash Associated disorder and prescribed Tylenol #3 (50 tablets). He encouraged her to mobilize as soon as possible. Her only other visit to her family doctor in connection with the accident was one week later, June 20, 1996, in a follow-up requested by Dr. Bond. She still complained of dizzy spells and headaches. Range of movement in her neck was 50% flexion and 90% in all other directions. She was still tender over the trapezius muscles and she mentioned pain in her right knee.
24  Dr. Bond called Ms. Blackburn in for an interview on December 24, 1998, when he was asked by counsel for a medical/legal report. Ms. Blackburn related to him at that time that her headaches had resolved within one year and the neck soreness with 5 to 6 months of the accident, but that for many months she had had frequent intrusive thoughts about the accident. These had gradually diminished but started up again after the legal process began and she was then feeling chronic anxiety and had lost enjoyment of driving. Dr. Bond diagnosed probable post-traumatic stress disorder and suggested to counsel in his report that she be seen in consultation by a psychiatrist or psychologist.
25  Ms. Blackburn was subsequently interviewed by psychiatrist Dr. Paul Janke for two hours on December 21, 2000. His conclusion was that she had symptoms of tension and anxiety that were related to the accident and it was imperative that she receive treatment in the form of psychotherapy cognitive-behavioral therapy and that she would also benefit from anti-anxiety medication or antidepressant medication. He expected a cost for medication between <damage type = "other">$50.00</damage> and <damage type = "other">$100.00</damage> per month over 8 to 18 months and suggested psychotherapy of 20 to 24 sessions over 12 to 18 months.
26  There is a mitigation issue in that Ms. Blackburn used a soft collar neck brace which was left over from another injury in the family, and this was clearly not consistent with Dr. Bond's direction to mobilize her neck right away. She also did not follow his advice regarding physiotherapy. The belated diagnosis of anxiety requiring protracted treatment is possibly due to her not consulting a medical professional in a timely fashion about her symptoms. She has not yet taken any of the treatment or medication suggested by Dr. Janke in January 2001, and it does not seem likely that she will.
27  Ms. Blackburn explained that she did not attend for treatment for her physical injuries more frequently simply because she does not like doctors. She has avoided treatment for her anxiety and depression because she does not want to relive the accident. She agreed on cross-examination that neither her physical injuries nor her emotional difficulties had changed her educational or career plans.
28  Plaintiff's counsel relies on the comments of the Court of Appeal (per Proudfoot J.A.) in Unger v. Singh and Dhaliwal , , as suggesting the universal low-end of the appropriate damages range for soft tissue injuries with some emotional problems is <damage type = "other">$35,000.00</damage>. As I read the case (para. 32 contains the language relied upon) the Court was not setting down any rule or even stating an opinion as to the limit of the range, but was summarizing the results of precedents cited by counsel in that case.
29  The plaintiff suggests the range of damages in this case, without the psychological component, should be <damage type = "other">$12,000.00</damage> to <damage type = "other">$15,000.00</damage>. The defendant suggests <damage type = "other">$9,000.00</damage> is more appropriate, on the basis that if Ms. Blackburn had followed medical advice, full resolution would have occurred in 6 to 8 months.
30  The defendant suggests that the award for the psychological component of non-pecuniary damages should not exceed <damage type = "other">$10,000.00</damage>, after taking into account Ms. Blackburn's failure to seek treatment. It is noteworthy that if Dr. Bond had not called Ms. Blackburn in for an interview in December 1998, she may never have brought her anxiety/depression difficulties to the medical profession. She is a self-reliant, independent person who, in my assessment, is not prone to overstate any of her symptomology. Dr. Janke inferred considerable psychological strength from Ms. Blackburn's manner of carrying on with life despite her difficulties.
31  In my assessment, the psychological difficulties have been much more significant to her than the physical injuries. A significant part of her anxiety relates to the suggested involvement of her hearing impairment as a cause of the accident, according to Dr. Janke. This is very different from the usual case where depression is caused by slow recovery from the physical injuries or to ongoing pain.
32  Unfortunately there is little direct assistance or guidance to be found in the authorities cited due to the uniqueness of this case. The plaintiff argues that there is no evidentiary foundation to support a mitigation argument in respect of the psychological injuries. I cannot agree with that submission. The evidence is that she suffered nightmares and intrusive thoughts and anxiety about automobile travel from immediately after the accident in June 1996 and failed to inform her doctor until December 1998.
33  Taking into account a failure to mitigate which has resulted in some avoidable protraction of physical injury as well as exacerbation of her anxiety/depression problems, I assess her non-pecuniary losses globally at <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$30,000.00</damage>.
34  Dr. Janke did not quantify the cost of the suggested psychotherapy as he did with medications, and no evidence was adduced on that item. Possibly her health care plan would cover all or a portion of some of the cost if she decides (uncharacteristically) to undertake the treatment. I think it is unlikely she will either undergo the treatment or take the suggested medication, but since this is a future cost, reasonable possibilities are to be measured. I award $1,000.00 for the contingency that either medication or therapy costs will be incurred.
35  In summary, the awards, subject to apportionment, are: non-pecuniary damages <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$30,000.00</damage>; property damage <damage type = "sub-special">$3,000.00</damage>; special damages <damage type = "special">$1,000.00</damage>. The plaintiff will recover judgment for <damage type = "total after">$6,800.00</damage> plus costs on Scale 3.
MEIKLEM J.
End of Document
First Majestic Silver Corp. v. Santos, [2013] B.C.J. No. 834
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
E.M. Myers J.
Heard: April 17-20, 23-24, 30, May 1-4, 7-11, 28-31, June 1,
4-8, 11-15, 18-22, 25-29, July 20, November 28-30, December
3-7, 10-14, 2012, January 14-17; February 21, 2013.
Judgment: April 24, 2013.
Docket: S078106
Registry: Vancouver
[2013] B.C.J. No. 834   |   2013 BCSC 717   |   15 B.L.R. (5th) 19   |   2013 CarswellBC 1055   |   228 A.C.W.S. (3d) 407
Between First Majestic Silver Corp., First Silver Reserve Inc., Minera El Pilon, S.A. de C.V., Plaintiffs, and Hector Davila Santos, Minerales y Minas Mexicana, S.A. de C.V., Defendants
(388 paras.)
[Editor's note: Supplemental reasons for judgment were released June 25, 2013. See .]
Case Summary
Corporations, partnerships and associations law — Corporations — Directors and officers — Duties and powers of directors — Personal liability of directors to the corporation — Breach of duty — Action by plaintiff mining companies for equitable compensation for breach of fiduciary duty by former director allowed — Davila learned of opportunity to acquire mining property while he was director of First Silver — He acquired property 14 months after he was director — Opportunity belonged to First Silver — Davila did not show that plaintiffs did not have financial capacity to purchase property or that they would not have done so — Plaintiffs were awarded $89.6 million US, after 15 per cent contingency.
Action by plaintiff mining companies for equitable compensation for breach of fiduciary duty by a former director. Davila learned of an opportunity to acquire a mining property while he was a director of First Silver. He sold his shares in First Silver to First Majestic, which then assumed control of First Silver. Davila acquired the property 14 months after he was a director. First Majestic and First Silver claimed that the acquisition was the corporate opportunity of First Silver. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 The opportunity belonged to First Silver. Davila's initial approach to the seller of the property was stated to be in representation of First Silver. Reports and deliberations took place at First Silver's Board, which approved the pursuit. Representatives of First Silver visited the property in order to assess its viability. The Board authorized the payment of a deposit with respect to it. Davila told the Board that the seller had signed a letter of intent with First Silver. First Silver had not determined that it was not interested in the property. There was no shared assumption that it was not First Silver's opportunity. Davila did not show that the plaintiffs did not have the financial capacity to purchase the property or that they would not have done so. The plaintiffs did not fail to mitigate their loss due to inactivity. Davila knew that they were asserting rights to the property. It was not open to him to second-guess the timing of their business decisions. The plaintiffs did not fail to mitigate their loss by not accepting Davila's offer to sell the property. The offer allowed only four days for acceptance and contained no provision to permit any due diligence investigation. The plaintiffs were awarded <damage type = "total after">$89.6 million</damage> US, after applying a 15 per cent contingency.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Barristers and Solicitors Act,
Business Corporations Act, SBC 2002, CHAPTER 57,
Currency Act, ,
Foreign Money Claims Act, RSBC 1996, CHAPTER 155,
The Law and Equity Act,
Supreme Court Civil Rules, Rule 13-1(8)
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiffs: Howard Shapray, Q.C., Brad Cramer, Francis Lamer.
Counsel for the Defendants: David Church, Q.C., Martin Bühler.
[Editor's note: Corrigenda were released by the Court April 26, June 17, and September 25, 2013; the corrections have been made to the text and the corrigenda are appended to this document.]
 Table of Contents Paragraph 
 I. INTRODUCTION [1] 
 II. FACTS [12] 
 A. The Bolanos property [12] 
 B. El Pilon, the San  
  Martin property,  
  and the reverse  
  takeover of El Pilon  
  by First Silver [16] 
 C. November 2004 to  
  January 2006 -  
  Mr. Davila's  
  dealings regarding  
  Bolanos [19] 
 D. February to April  
  2006 - First  
  Majestic's  
  negotiations with  
  Mr. Davila for his  
  shares in First Silver  
  and Mr. Davila's  
  continued dealings  
  with Grupo Mexico  
  re: Bolanos [32] 
1.  March 27, 2006 meeting  
  between Mr. Davila and  
  Ramon [40] 
2.  Mr. Davila's March 31  
  correspondence [47] 
3.  The April 3, 2006  
  meeting and share  
  purchase agreement [49] 
 E. Events after  
  April 3, 2006 [56] 
 F. April 20, 2006 meeting  
  between Mr. Neumeyer and  
  Mr. Davila and the  
  proposed addendum [61] 
 G. May 2006 to November 2008 [68] 
 III. IS MR. DAVILA LIABLE FOR BREACH OF  
 FIDUCIARY DUTY TO FIRST SILVER? [110] 
 A. Was Bolanos First  
  Silver's opportunity -  
  the Foss v. Harbottle argument [125] 
 B. Was Bolanos a corporate  
  opportunity at all? [125] 
 C. Did Mr. Davila breach his  
  fiduciary duty when he  
  sent the April 4, 2006  
  letter to Grupo? [131] 
 D. Did Mr. Davila breach  
  his fiduciary duty to  
  First Silver when he  
  indirectly acquired  
  Bolanos in August 2007? [141] 
1.  Did Mr. Davila's fiduciary  
  obligation extend until  
  August 2007? [145] 
2.  Was Bolanos still First  
  Silver's corporate  
  opportunity in August 2007? [150] 
 E. Affirmative defences [155] 
1.  Estoppel by convention [159] 
 a) Shared assumption [160] 
 b) Detrimental reliance [164] 
 c) Unfairness [170] 
2.  Waiver [171] 
3.  Acquiescence [176] 
4.  Estoppel [182] 
5.  Unclean hands [184] 
 IV. TIME OF ELECTION OF REMEDIES FOR  
 BREACH OF FIDUCIARY DUTY [188] 
 A. "able to make an informed choice" [198] 
 B. "before final judgment is issued" [204] 
 C. Conclusion [214] 
 V. APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES OF EQUITABLE  
 COMPENSATION [219] 
 A. General principles [219] 
 B. Causation [233] 
 C. Mitigation [236] 
 D. Negative contingencies [243] 
 E. Market valuation or discounted  
  cash flow analysis? [249] 
 VI. MITIGATION AND CAUSATION [249] 
 A. Did the plaintiffs fail to mitigate  
  their loss when they did not accept  
  the defendants' November 24, 2008  
  offer to sell Bolanos? [252] 
 B. Did the breach of fiduciary duty  
  cause the plaintiffs any loss or  
  did the plaintiffs fail to  
  mitigate their loss due to their  
  inactivity? [265] 
 C. Would the plaintiffs have purchased  
  Bolanos in any event of the breach? [272] 
1.  First Majestic's or First  
  Silver's financial capability  
  to purchase Bolanos [272] 
2.  Would the plaintiffs have  
  gone ahead with the purchase  
  of Bolanos? [279] 
 D. When would the plaintiffs have  
  acquired and developed Bolanos? [285] 
 VII. QUANTIFICATION OF THE EQUITABLE  
 COMPENSATION [293] 
 A. The use of the prior transaction  
  and its weighting by Behre Dolbear [305] 
 B. The income approach [313] 
1.  Silver prices [316] 
2.  Resource estimates [320] 
3.  Capital and mining costs  
  estimates [323] 
4.  Costs of mill restoration [325] 
 a) Mill improvements  
  done by MMM [327] 
 b) The tailings dam cost [345] 
 c) Conclusion on the  
  costs of the mill  
  restoration [348] 
5.  Discount rate for assumed  
  pre-trial earnings [349] 
 C. Conclusion on the income approach [356] 
 D. The claim for lost revenue from  
  processing Mr. Davila's tailings [361] 
 E. Contingencies [372] 
 F. Conclusion on the amount  
  of equitable compensation [382] 
 VIII. OTHER MATTERS [383] 
IX. CAST OF CHARACTERS
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
E.M. MYERS J.
I. INTRODUCTION
1  This is primarily a claim for breach of fiduciary duty against a former corporate director with respect to a corporate opportunity to acquire a mining property in Mexico, known as the Bolanos property.
2  The plaintiff Minera El Pilon S.A. de C.V. is a wholly owned Mexican subsidiary of the plaintiff First Silver Reserve Inc. Mr. Davila was a director of both companies until, respectively, May and June 2006, when the plaintiff First Majestic Silver Corp. purchased Mr. Davila's shares in First Silver Reserve Inc. First Majestic and First Silver are both British Columbia companies.
3  In August 2007, Mr. Davila indirectly acquired the Bolanos property, when he, through a company owned by him, bought the shares of the defendant Minerales y Minas Mexicana, S.A. de C.V., which owned the property. First Silver Reserve claims that the Bolanos acquisition was its corporate opportunity and that Mr. Davila breached his fiduciary duty by acquiring the mine and in the steps he took to enable the acquisition.
4  In the alternative to breach of fiduciary duty, the plaintiffs advance claims in fraud, interference with economic relations, conspiracy and inducing breach of contract, and plead waiver of tort.
5  First Silver Reserve assigned its claims to First Majestic Silver. The latter company claims as assignee and in the alternative, under the "one enterprise theory".
6  The defendants deny that Mr. Davila breached his fiduciary duties. They say that the plaintiffs were aware of Mr. Davila's desire to purchase the mine, and told him that they did not want it for themselves. The defendants rely on the defences of laches, estoppel by convention and acquiescence. The defendants also say that the plaintiffs could not fund the acquisition of the property and therefore their alleged loss was not caused by Mr. Davila.
7  A central issue in this case is who "owned" the Bolanos opportunity. The defendants' first position is that it was Mr. Davila's. Alternatively, they argue that it belonged to El Pilon. It follows, they say, that First Silver, as El Pilon's parent company, has no cause of action and they plead the rule in Foss v. Harbottle (1843), 2 Hare 461, 67 E.R. 189 (Ch).
8  The defendants also argue that the claims of El Pilon are governed by Mexican law, and under that law Mr. Davila has no liability. The defendants further argued that this Court does not have the jurisdiction to adjudicate El Pilon's claims. I note here that Mr. Davila did not raise similar challenges to the claims made against him by First Silver. It is clear that the court has such jurisdiction since Mr. Davila was a director of First Silver, it is a British Columbia company, and the claims directly relate to his directorship.
9  This brief introduction provides only the most cursory introduction to the claims and to some of the issues raised in this case, but it should give the reader enough of a broad overview to avoid getting lost in the details as I lay them out.
10  I will provide abbreviations for the people and companies as they come up in the narrative. At the end of the judgment there is a full cast of characters and abbreviations. For the parties to the action, I will use the following abbreviations:
 First Majestic Silver Corp. First Majestic 
 First Silver Reserve Inc. First Silver 
 Minera El Pilon, S.A. de C.V. El Pilon 
 Hector Davila Santos Mr. Davila 
 Minerales y Minas Mexicana MMM 
11  For the reasons that follow, I conclude that the Bolanos opportunity belonged to First Silver and that Mr. Davila breached the fiduciary duty he owed to First Silver. It is therefore unnecessary for me to decide whether El Pilon also has a claim and to decide the related issues of Mexican law. I also conclude that the plaintiffs did not fail to mitigate their loss.
II. FACTS
A. The Bolanos property
12  In 1965 Mr. Davila and his brothers began assembling claims in the Bolanos area. In 1968 they set up the company Minerales de Bolanos S.A. de C.V., known as MIBOSA, to hold the claims. These claims form the Bolanos property that, in turn, is comprised of five mineral veins, also referred to in the evidence as individual mines. They are El Alacran, San Francisco, Veta Rica, San Jose and Santa Fe.
13  MIBOSA put up a mill on the Bolanos property. This mill was the beginning of what is referred to as La Huichola mill, which is being used today and figures in the lawsuit.
14  MIBOSA deposited waste tailings from its mining operations in a containment pond known as El Potrero. In approximately 1978 or 1979, the tailings dam broke, and the tailings were spewed on the other side of the Bolanos River. That land and the tailings on it are owned by Mr. Davila. While that ownership is not in issue, the processing of the tailings are relevant to the compensation claimed by the plaintiffs, as I will explain later.
15  As a result of the bankruptcy of MIBOSA the Bolanos property was eventually acquired by a Mexican mining company, Grupo Mexico ("Grupo"), in about 1993. Several witnesses referred to it as the largest Mexican mining company. As I will set out in detail, Mr. Davila indirectly purchased Bolanos from Grupo in August 2007, giving rise to this litigation.
 B.  El Pilon, the San Martin property, and the reverse takeover of El Pilon by First Silver 
16  Mr. Davila formed El Pilon in the 1970s to own another silver mining property he had bought, known as the San Martin mine.
17  In 1997 Mr. Davila thought that it would be beneficial for El Pilon to have access to the public markets through First Silver's listing on the Vancouver Stock Exchange. El Pilon is a Mexican company and First Silver is incorporated in British Columbia. The same year, through a reverse takeover, Mr. Davila acquired approximately 85% of the shares of First Silver. El Pilon became a wholly owned subsidiary of First Silver and Mr. Davila became president and chief executive officer of First Silver.
18  As of June 22, 1998, the Canadian directors of First Silver were Len Brownlie, James O'Rourke, and Lawrence Barr. Rod Shier was its Chief Financial Officer.
 C.  November 2004 to January 2006 - Mr. Davila's dealings regarding Bolanos 
19  In this section, I set out the history of Mr. Davila's dealings regarding the Bolanos property that form the essence of this action.
20  In January 2002 Grupo began efforts to sell the Bolanos property, through its subsidiary, Industrial Minera Mexico, SA. de C.V. ("IMMSA"). Mr. Davila learned of those efforts and at his instructions on November 3, 2004 a letter was sent to Remigio Martinez at Grupo expressing interest in the property. The letter was on the letterhead of El Pilon and stated:
In representation of FIRST SILVER RESERVE INC., with offices in Vancouver, B.C. and listed on the Toronto Exchange Stock under the symbol FSR, I would like to inform you that we are a mining company operating in the San Martin de Bolanos district, State of Jalisco; through Minera El Pilon, S.A. de C.V. as a subsidiary.
We have been informed of your Company's intention to seek a transaction with a view to disposing of your properties in the Bolanos mining district, Jalisco; I hereby advise you of our intention to seek an opportunity to be considered by you in order to be in a position to make an offer for the acquisition of the aforementioned properties.
To this end, we would like to update our knowledge of the technical information about your Bolanos Unit, and are requesting authorization to visit your facilities and mines.
Of course, we agree in advance to any measures you may impose in order to subject the visit to the guidelines that you establish.
I look forward to hearing from you regarding this matter.
The letter was signed by Armando Ibarra, the operations manager of El Pilon. He and Mr. Martinez had a long-standing personal relationship.
21  A copy of the letter was sent to Mr. Brownlie (a director and the corporate secretary of First Silver) and the approach to Grupo was reported to the board of First Silver at its meeting of November 8, 2004. The minutes state:
The Chairman also noted that Armando had entered into negotiations with a contact at IMSSA regarding purchase of the Bolanos mine for approximately US<damage type = "other">$15,000,000</damage>. If the negotiations are successful, Armando should receive a bonus set by the board.
22  On December 13, 2004 Mr. Davila wrote to Mr. Martinez stating:
Our company has given me authorization to purchase all properties and goods under the control of your company in the Bolanos mining district, Jalisco, pursuant to the following terms:
* The amount we are offering to pay is 16,000,000.00 (Sixteen Million US Dollars), in one single payment.
* For this purpose, we required a one-year time period be granted to us.
As an indication of the goodwill and seriousness of this proposal, upon signing of the contract, the amount of 50,000.00 (Fifty Thousand US Dollars) will be delivered to your company, which amount will be credited toward the total price if the option is exercised. Otherwise, if the option is not exercised for causes imputable to us, we agree that this sum will remain with your company.
If this proposal is accepted, further details can be discussed or clarified at a subsequent meeting.
I look forward to your reply.
Sincerely,
[signature]
Minera El Pilon S.A. de C.V.
First Silver Reserve Inc.
Mr. Hector Davila Santos
General Manager
The letter was on El Pilon letterhead, but it is to be noted that Mr. Davila signed on behalf of both El Pilon and First Silver.
23  A number of other letters following this were sent to Mr. Martinez on El Pilon letterhead. A letter sent on May 6, 2005 ended with:
Upon formalization of the option in question, Minera El Pilon agrees that it will ensure that all obligations derived from the mining concessions, taxes, etc., are satisfied by them in a timely fashion, and Grupo Mexico undertakes to grant facilities such that Minera El Pilon can make the necessary arrangements to successfully carry out the said option, including the required controlling shares.
24  On August 9, 2005, Mr. Davila emailed the First Silver directors and the CFO informing them that Armando Ibarra had been told they were welcome to visit the Bolanos property, and that there would be a geologist on hand to show them documents.
25  On August 15 to 16, 2005, personnel from First Silver and El Pilon visited the Bolanos site, including Jim O'Rourke and another director, Robert Young. They were provided with a brochure prepared by Grupo setting out the Grupo-calculated reserves. Mr. Young did a rough calculation and formed the view that Bolanos was a good prospect and should be pursued to the due diligence stage. He reported this to the board of First Silver.
26  On November 14, 2005, Mr. Martinez wrote to Mr. Davila addressing him in his capacity as general manager of El Pilon. The letter proposed new terms for the purchase of the Bolanos assets, including a time for due diligence up to March 31, 2006, and a revised payment schedule that included an initial payment of US <damage type = "other">$2 million</damage> at the end of the due diligence period. Mr. Davila informed the First Silver board of the letter at a meeting on November 14, 2005.
27  On November 21, 2005, Mr. Davila wrote to Remigio Martinez on El Pilon letterhead. He said he accepted the terms set out in Mr. Martinez's letter of November 14, 2005 and requested a time and place to "formalize" the deal with the appropriate legal instruments.
28  On November 28, 2005, Mr. Martinez emailed Mr. Davila a confidentiality agreement and a draft letter agreement. The same day, Mr. Davila emailed Mr. Martinez returning the signed confidentiality agreement and stating that the terms of the letter agreement were fine. The letter agreement itself was not signed by Mr. Davila. Both the confidentiality agreement and the letter agreement show El Pilon as the purchaser.
29  On December 16, 2005, Mr. Davila advised the First Silver board that there was a litigation problem between another Davila family member and Grupo and that the four months of due diligence contemplated in the Bolanos acquisition arrangement would begin only after that was settled. Therefore no progress could be expected on the deal during January 2006. Mr. Davila also reported to the board the payment terms he believed Grupo would want.
30  On January 23, 2006 there was another meeting of the First Silver Board where Bolanos was discussed. The minutes note a discussion as to, amongst other things, its economic viability. Further, they record the following decisions:
The Board enthusiastically agreed that the Company should proceed with the acquisition of Bolanos.
Jim O'Rourke suggested that before the Bolanos deal was finalized, FSR should hire Pincock, Allen and Holt to review the Immsa resource calculation and complete a 43-101 reserve/resource report on Bolanos. The board was unanimously in agreement with this proposal and the President was asked to proceed accordingly.
The President agreed to proceed to have the Company put up the <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage> and have a report done by Pincock, Allen and Holt.
31  In his evidence, Mr. Davila challenged the accuracy of the minutes in two respects. First, he does not remember any level of "enthusiasm". Second, he said that he had only agreed to proceed to have First Silver put up the <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage> once there was financing in place for the balance of the <damage type = "other">$16 million</damage> acquisition price. I do not think that the level of enthusiasm is relevant and the surrounding evidence does not support any qualification to the direction to pay the deposit.
 D.  February to April 2006 - First Majestic's negotiations with Mr. Davila for his shares in First Silver and Mr. Davila's continued dealings with Grupo Mexico re: Bolanos 
32  Mr. Davila wanted to sell his shares in First Silver. In 2003 he had a brief discussion about selling his shares to First Majestic with First Majestic's president, Keith Neumeyer, but Mr. Neumeyer thought the price too expensive. By February 2006 Mr. Davila had had discussions with several companies and around that time he began having discussions with First Majestic, through its chief operating officer, Ramon Davila. I will refer to him by his first name, Ramon, in order to avoid confusion with the defendant. On February 15, 2006, Ramon provided Mr. Davila with a signed confidentiality and non-disclosure agreement on behalf of First Majestic.
33  At this stage, First Majestic's interest was in the San Martin mine; as will be seen, it did not learn of First Silver's or Mr. Davila's potential interest in Bolanos until later.
34  During February and March, 2006, several inspection visits to the San Martin mine were made by First Majestic personnel.
35  On March 3, 2006 Ramon and Mr. Davila met at Mr. Davila's office to discuss the possible share purchase. There is no dispute that Bolanos was not mentioned.
36  On March 17, 2006 Mr. Ibarra wrote to Mr. Martinez of Grupo. This is a key letter and I set it out in full:
We apologize for taking your time to request that you kindly provide us with an official communication to assure us and confirm the offer of sale that you made to us, for a price of 16 million U.S. dollars, to which we replied with our acceptance of the terms for purchase of your Bolanos Project.
Along with your endorsement of this confirmation, in the document you will be sending us we would ask that that in addition to First Silver Reserve, Inc., Hector Davila Santos be mentioned as an alternate buyer, to allow us greater room for maneuverability.
The reason for this request is as follows:
Some of the firms that have expressed interest in purchasing First Silver's shares have mentioned that the price being negotiated for Bolanos seems high to them, and should the purchase of First Silver's shares go through, we want to avoid a situation where the buyers refuse to accept the commitment of the Bolanos option, and in that case Hector Davila Santos could exercise it as such, since we continue to uphold the economic terms that were presented to us and were accepted.
Another aspect they find odd is the fact that we have no signed contract or any agreement if a considerable time has passed since acceptance of the terms.
We ask that you kindly provide us the document requested, and reiterate to you our firm interest in completing this transaction.
[Emphasis added]
37  On March 22, 2006 there was another board meeting of First Silver. As of this date, the directors of First Silver consisted of Mr. Davila, his friend and personal lawyer Victor Garcia, Bob Young and Bernard Fahy, a chartered accountant. Len Brownlie and James O'Rourke had resigned in January and February 2006.
38  The minutes of the meeting record:
The President noted that a list of assets is being prepared by the Vendor for the Bolanos project and he hopes to have the Company sign the agreement in the near future. The President noted that First Silver has the option on Bolanos, but that if the Company did not pick up the option that he may do so personally.
Mr. Young testified that this was consistent with what Mr. Davila had communicated previously.
39  At some point after the minutes were issued, Mr. Davila crossed out this paragraph and wrote "not applicable anymore" beside it. In his discovery evidence Mr. Davila said that he did this because the asset sale had changed to a share purchase. At trial he said that he was mistaken and that he made the change because after the minutes were finalised, First Silver was no longer going to be buying Bolanos. I do not think it matters which version - if any - is correct.
 1.  March 27, 2006 meeting between Mr. Davila and Ramon 
40  On March 27, 2006 there was another meeting between Ramon and Mr. Davila, again at the latter's office. First Majestic's president, Keith Neumeyer, participated by telephone. The purpose was to discuss the terms of the possible share sale.
41  Mr. Davila said that Bolanos was not mentioned at the meeting.
42  Ramon's evidence was that Mr. Davila said he had an option to purchase the Bolanos property; he owned the tailings across the river and he wanted to sell both of them for a price over and above his shares in First Silver. Mr. Davila left the room so that Ramon could discuss the matter in private with Mr. Neumeyer. It was agreed between the two of them that they would leave Bolanos and the tailings to a later time and focus on the acquisition of First Silver/San Martin. Ramon relayed that to Mr. Davila.
43  Mr. Neumeyer's evidence was similar.
44  In cross-examination both Mr. Neumeyer and Ramon clarified that while Mr. Davila mentioned Bolanos, they came to the conclusion that he owned it or the option over it, as opposed to him specifically having told them that he owned it or had the option to it.
45  The balance of the discussions concerned possible formulas for the price of Mr. Davila's First Silver shares. It was left that the parties would have further discussions.
46  Ramon said that when he left the meeting, Mr. Davila gave him a brochure about Bolanos that had been prepared by Grupo.
2. Mr. Davila's March 31 correspondence
47  On March 31, 2006, Mr. Davila wrote Mr. Martinez. Once again, the topic was who should be named as purchaser for the Bolanos transaction:
With regard to our intention of carrying out the purchase of your Bolanos Project, and with a view to maintaining a greater margin of maneuverability, when the respective agreement or letter of intent is drafted, I would be most grateful if you would assure that it be duly recorded therein that the purchase may be made by Minera El Pilon, S.A. de C.V., of which I am General Manager, or by Hector Davila Santos as an individual.
48  The same day Mr. Davila emailed Mr. Fahey. He stated:
Hi Bernei [sic ],
Just to let you know that I have sent by courier a booklet on the properties of Bolanos so that you may know what we are buying. It[']s in Spanish so if you have any problem let me know.
Today we got word that the legal department of Grupo Mexico is preparing the contract for the sale, so we should be signing next week or so.
Therefore, I consider it very important that the news release of you[r] Directorship go out on Monday or [T]uesday at the latest. After that would come the Bolanos acquisition and after that maybe the other deal (my sale).
I'll leave up to you and Bob as to the best way to handle this news.
 3.  The April 3, 2006 meeting and share purchase agreement 
49  The agreement for the purchase of Mr. Davila's First Silver shares was finalised and signed on April 3, 2006. Ramon met with Mr. Davila at the latter's office. Ramon brought a draft agreement with him along with his computer.
50  According to Mr. Davila this is the first time he saw any draft agreement. He said that he raised Bolanos for the first time with Ramon at this meeting and that Ramon got very nervous and called Mr. Neumeyer. After speaking with Mr. Neumeyer, Ramon passed his cell phone to Mr. Davila. Mr. Davila tried to convince Mr. Neumeyer that Bolanos was a good property, but Mr. Neumeyer said, "No." Mr. Davila then said that they should forget about the tailings pond and Bolanos, and just do a deal on his shares in First Silver, but Mr. Neumeyer said they would think of something and asked Mr. Davila to pass the phone to Ramon. Mr. Davila acknowledged that the price for Bolanos was not discussed.
51  Mr. Davila further testified that Ramon had a problem with his laptop computer so, while still on the phone with Mr. Neumeyer, he made changes to the agreement on Mr. Davila's computer. This contained clause 13, which reads:
OTHER PROPERTIES OF INTEREST
It is understood by the Purchaser that the Seller has interests in other mining properties in Mexico that he wishes to sell. More specifically a tailings deposit and a potential interest in the Bolanos mine. Upon execution of this Agreement, the Seller hereby grants the Purchaser the right of first refusal in respect to the negotiations and purchase of these and any mining properties the Seller has an interest in.
52  The evidence of Mr. Neumeyer and Ramon is different. Mr. Neumeyer testified that following the March 27 meeting he instructed First Majestic's corporate secretary, Jude Fawcett, to prepare a draft agreement, and that he had several discussions with Mr. Davila before it was finalised and signed. Clause 13 had been inserted into the agreement (in prior drafts it was numbered as cl. 10) at Mr. Davila's insistence.
53  Ramon testified that when he went to Mr. Davila's office the proposed agreement was in a form close to the one that was signed. A substantive change was made with respect to the share price and other changes were minor.
54  Mr. Davila justified much of his further conduct on the basis that First Majestic - who was to become the controlling shareholder of First Silver - had rejected the Bolanos opportunity at this meeting. I will return to this at para. 135.
55  It is not disputed that Mr. Davila did not disclose his dealings with the First Silver board to Mr. Neumeyer or Ramon.
E. Events after April 3, 2006
56  On April 4, 2006 Mr. Davila wrote to Mr. Martinez on El Pilon letterhead purporting to revoke all prior negotiations. This is another letter that is central to this case, and I set it out in full:
As the representative of MINERA EL PILON, S.A. DE C.V. and FIRST SILVER RESERVE, INC., please be advised that all purchase offers and negotiations we have made prior to today's date in regard to the Bolanos Project are hereby REVOKED AND RENDERED NULL AND VOID, particularly those contained in writings or communications dated October 31, November 7, November 14 and November 21, all in 2005, given that the payment schedule proposed by your company on November 14, 2005 and accepted by us on the 21st of that month was not fulfilled, nor was the "due diligence" carried out, nor was a purchase agreement entered into within the term specified to us for it to be exercised, which expired this past March 31; and, in addition, because a contract was signed yesterday with FIRST MAJESTIC RESOURCE CORP. for the sale of all my share holdings in MINERA EL PILON, S.A. de C.V. and FIRST MAJESTIC, who rejected the acquisition of the BOLANOS PROJECT and the TAILINGS DAM in the said contract.
In this regard, I remind you that on November 3, 2004, we started talks with a view to purchasing the Bolanos Project through Minera El Pilon, S.A. de C.V., with financing from FIRST SILVER RESERVE, INC., due to the interest we had in obtaining more projects, in order to increase the group's production capacity, but due to various circumstances we were not, and are not in a position to realize the purchase.
57  Mr. Davila said he sent the letter because he believed that First Majestic had rejected the purchase of Bolanos and had instead taken a right of first refusal.
58  On the same day, Mr. Davila advised the other First Silver directors of his share sale.
59  On April 6, 2006 Mr. Davila emailed Mr. Fahey:
The Bolanos deal is still in the air (today we were told that it would be any day now but we have Easter around the corner and here nothing is done during those days and a little before and a little after), but we should be signing right after the holidays. You and I will sit down once we have it and I'll explain what we are going to do and the best way to go about it.
60  Further emails were exchanged between Mr. Fahey and Mr. Davila, which are difficult to reconcile on any basis other than they were not ad idem as to the state of play of Bolanos. The exchange culminated in an email from Mr. Fahey on April 13, 2006, sent after he had met with Mr. Neumeyer:
... It is clear from Neumeyer's point of view that First Majestic expects First Silver (not Hector Davila Santos) to be awarded the contract by Grupo-Mexico and that they will take on the responsibility of raising the required funds for First Silver to carry through the purchase.
...
While I did not read the minutes in detail, it would appear that it is the intention of First Silver to acquire the Bolanos property. Based on the minutes and the declared intention of Neumeyer it would appear that there is no alternative but for the Bolanos transaction to be carried out by First Silver.
 F.  April 20, 2006 meeting between Mr. Neumeyer and Mr. Davila and the proposed addendum 
61  On April 20, 2006, Mr. Davila met with Keith Neumeyer in Guadalajara. This was the first face-to-face meeting between them. Ramon accompanied Mr. Neumeyer to the meeting but he spent most of the time in another room meeting with Mr. Ibarra about operational matters.
62  Mr. Neumeyer said he was suspicious about Bolanos prior to the meeting. He asked Mr. Davila about Bolanos and said he was told that First Silver had rejected the prospect. Mr. Neumeyer's note of the meeting said:
Bolanos - not accepted by FSR
<damage type = "other">$US 16 million</damage>
<damage type = "other">$2</damage> in 3 months
<damage type = "other">$4</damage> " 6 "
<damage type = "other">$10</damage> " 15 "
63  Ramon recalled that over lunch Mr. Davila brought up Bolanos and his tailings as something that First Majestic should acquire "from him".
64  Mr. Davila's evidence on what he relayed at this meeting about First Silver having previously rejected Bolanos was contradictory. At one point he said he told Mr. Neumeyer that First Silver itself had rejected Bolanos. At another point he denied having said that; rather, in his mind, First Silver's rejection of Bolanos occurred on April 3, 2006 when First Majestic refused the opportunity, for itself and First Silver.
65  There was also a discussion about the transfer or purchase of some small company items and personally owned items to Mr. Davila's company.
66  Mr. Neumeyer left the meeting as suspicious as he was going in. However, he was not worried about First Silver's ability to assert whatever rights it may have had over Bolanos once First Majestic assumed control.
67  At some point after the April 20 meeting Mr. Davila sent Mr. Neumeyer a proposed addendum to the contract. With respect to clause 13 of the share purchase agreement (quoted above, para. 51) it stated:
13.0 - Other Properties of Interest - First Majestic Resource Corp. acknowledges that in the negotiations it was offered three properties; FSR shares, the tailings pond, and the Bolanos Project assets, but it chose to take the FSR shares first and the other properties at a later date, which gave rise to 'the "right of first refusal" clause. It is agreed that 'the "right of first refusal" clause shall be waived until after the tailings pond and the Bolanos assets are incorporated in a company owned by the Davila Heitz family, and then for a period of 5 years only.
First Majestic Resource Corp. and First Silver Reserve recognize and respect the right of Hector Davila Santos to purchase the Bolanos Project assets and will in no way hinder, undermine, or obstruct the negotiations [sic] currently underway with Grupo Mexico.
First Majestic never signed the addendum and Mr. Neumeyer testified that he never verbally committed to any of the points contained in it. Mr. Neumeyer said this document created further suspicions that "there was something haywire going on", but at the point of its receipt he still did not know the details of the relationship between Grupo and Mr. Davila regarding Bolanos.
G. May 2006 to November 2008
68  On May 3, 2006, Mr. Davila had Mr. Ibarra fax Mr. Martinez a letter of intent for the purchase of Bolanos signed by Mr. Davila on behalf of Minera Arroyo del Agua, S.A. de C.V. Mr. Davila owned and controlled this company.
69  As part of its due diligence analysis First Majestic commissioned a report by a lawyer, Joe Giuffre. On May 12, he prepared a report which referred to the minutes of First Silver's board meetings, including portions of the minutes concerning Bolanos. The report was read by both Mr. Neumeyer and Ramon. However, the January 23, 2006 minutes (above, para. 30) were not included in the report. Those minutes were only seen by First Majestic at the end of July, 2006 after it took control of First Silver and had the company's documents delivered to it.
70  On May 15, 2006 Ramon met with Mr. Martinez and asked about the status of Bolanos and whether it was true that Mr. Davila was negotiating for it. Mr. Martinez told Ramon that:
... the original deal they had with the group represented by Hector Davila was on the name of First Silver Reserve, or Minera El Pilon or Hector Davila... And he told me that at Hector's request they have change the option to his name or a company owned by Hector himself."
He went on to explain the difficulties Grupo was having with Mr. Davila's brothers with respect to ownership of the tailings.
71  Ramon told Mr. Martinez that First Majestic was in the process of acquiring Mr. Davila's shares in First Silver and that "we" were interested in acquiring the Bolanos property assets.
72  Ramon reported on the meeting in an email to Mr. Neumeyer saying that he thought Grupo would take time to complete the Bolanos deal with Mr. Davila. He advised that First Majestic should "stay in standby to see what happens with Bolanos".
73  Mr. Neumeyer explained his thinking at this point:
Remigio [Martinez] knows that we're who will be taking control of First Silver and it says clearly in this paragraph that we're going through with the acquisition of First Silver and that we are interested in those assets remaining - meaning we're telling Remigio that once we complete the transaction of First Silver that we're going to open discussions with Grupo Mexico regarding Bolanos.
74  On May 16, Mr. Neumeyer emailed Mr. Davila to advise that everything looked in order with respect to the closing. In the last paragraph of the email he said:
Also, please accept this email as your authorization to transfer any personally owned mining claims or assets into your privately held company name as we discussed in our meeting in your office. I think you've been waiting for me to respond officially on that point."
The following day, Mr. Davila requested clarification:
Thank you for the authorizacion [sic] on the assets (would those be the vehicles and other odds and ends we discussed at the meeting?)
Mr. Neumeyer responded on May 18, 2006:
The asset transfer is in relation to your personally held mining properties, not the vehicles.
75  Mr. Neumeyer deliberately avoided raising his concerns regarding Bolanos with Mr. Davila. He testified:
 Q:  Right. And what did you mean by 'personally owned mining claims or assets'? 
 A:  Well, by this time we had received his addendum so we were, you know, fairly - this response was a clever response. I was kind of onto him. There was something going on. I still didn't have all the information but there was really no reason for us to not allow him to transfer personally held property. But I was very specific and very strategic in my response and I wrote it in this manner. 
76  There were at least three reasons why Mr. Neumeyer did not want to directly confront Mr. Davila or Grupo with respect to Bolanos in the late spring and summer of 2006. First, he wanted to close the share transaction with Mr. Davila. Second, First Majestic was in the process of acquiring another silver property - Quebradillas - from Grupo and he did not want to "muddy the waters" with Grupo. Finally, he said he was still gathering information on the true status of Bolanos.
77  On May 23, 2006 Ramon met again with Remigio Martinez of Grupo. Mr. Martinez said that Grupo was re-evaluating its position with respect to all of the assets it had been selling.
78  The purchase of Mr. Davila's First Silver shares closed on May 30, 2006. First Majestic made the first payment to Mr. Davila of approximately US <damage type = "other">$26 million</damage> and gave him a promissory note to secure its remaining obligations under the share purchase agreement.
79  On May 31, 2006 First Majestic assumed formal and operational control of El Pilon and Mr. Davila resigned his posts. First Majestic assumed operational control over First Silver on June 1. On June 19, 2006 at a general meeting of First Silver, all of the directors but for Mr. Young resigned and the remainder of the positions were filled by officers and directors of First Majestic. From that point forward there was no distinction between the corporate minds of First Majestic and First Silver.
80  On July 3, 2006 Mr. Davila sent an enhanced offer to Grupo for the purchase of Bolanos, because he had not heard back from Mr. Martinez with respect to his May 3 offer (above, para. 68). The offer was for the assets of MMM.
81  Also on July 3, Mr. Neumeyer emailed Ramon saying it was important to reach a deal with Grupo on Quebradillas as soon as possible and then move to prevent Mr. Davila from acquiring Bolanos.
82  On August 2, 2006 there was a meeting of the First Silver board. Bolanos was discussed. The board authorised Ramon to advise Grupo that First Silver was still interested in pursuing Bolanos. Ramon said he would provide written notice and would advise the board of the outcome. Ramon did not contact Grupo until September 8, 2006 (below, para. 87). He said the direction from the board did not contain a deadline and that he and Mr. Neumeyer decided to wait until the Quebradillas transaction had completed.
83  First Majestic's takeover of First Silver was to be accomplished, in part, by a plan of arrangement. On August 10, 2006, at First Majestic's request, Mr. Davila signed a "Representation Letter", which was necessary for the plan of arrangement.
84  Mr. Davila continued with his efforts to acquire Bolanos. By August 30, 2006 he had received a draft contract from Mr. Martinez. It defined the purchasing parties as Minera Arroyo, El Pilon and First Silver. On August 30, Mr. Davila responded to Mr. Martinez with a number of requested changes, one of which was:
...the contract through me is signed only by Minera Arroyo del Agua, S.A. de CV as 'THE PURCHASING PARTY'.
Mr. Martinez responded:
I received your letter and we are studying it, along with the clause that you indicated to me. I believe you are right, but I want to be sure that First Silver acknowledges that the right to negotiate is Arroyo del Aqua's. I can give you a definite answer next week.
85  The board of First Silver met on September 7, 2006. As a result of the discussions, Gillian Case, counsel for First Majestic, drafted a letter to Mr. Davila, notifying him of First Silver's intention to acquire Bolanos. The draft letter also requested that Mr. Davila not contact Southern Copper (the Grupo subsidiary then in charge of the sale of Bolanos and other assets). The letter was never sent.
86  On September 8 a judge of this Court approved the plan of arrangement pursuant to the Business Corporations Act, S.B.C. 2002, c. 57. Under the arrangement First Majestic acquired all of the non-Davila shares in First Silver.
87  The same day, Ramon emailed Mr. Martinez stating that the previous offer from First Silver and El Pilon to acquire Bolanos was still in effect. This was the first communication between Ramon and Mr. Martinez since their May 15, 2006 meeting. No response was received.
88  By mid-September, 2006, both Mr. Davila and Ramon learned from Grupo that it would not sell to either side unless they resolved their differences:
On September 12, 2006, Ramon had a telephone conversation with Mr. Martinez. Mr. Martinez told Ramon that Grupo did not want to be involved in a legal situation between the plaintiffs and Mr. Davila, and that they should reach an agreement amongst themselves. Ramon told Mr. Martinez that the plaintiffs would do their best to do that.
Mr. Davila said he got a call from Mr. Martinez who relayed Ramon's position. Mr. Martinez said that he was suspending all negotiations with Mr. Davila because of that and that Mr. Davila and First Majestic should settle the issue between themselves. He said he was holding back and not selling anything.
89  On September 13, 2006, Mr. Davila called Ramon. Ramon described Mr. Davila as being very angry and cursing at him. Mr. Davila said that Ramon had caused him "big damage" and that First Majestic better back off from its position to Grupo Mexico regarding Bolanos. He said that First Majestic did not have the right to interfere with his right to acquire Bolanos. He threatened to sue First Majestic.
90  On September 15, 2006, Mr. Davila emailed Mr. Neumeyer, Ramon, and Mr. Martinez. The email said that Ramon's September 12, 2006 call to Mr. Martinez (to say that First Silver had the right to negotiate for Bolanos) stopped Mr. Davila from signing a contract for the purchase of Bolanos. He asked that First Majestic send a letter to Mr. Martinez, stating Mr. Davila or his designate was entitled to negotiate for Bolanos, and that First Silver's interest in the Bolanos property was set out in the share purchase agreement.
91  On September 16, Mr. Neumeyer emailed Mr. Martinez and said:
[I]t is the view of FR [First Majestic] that Hector Davila's actions have been immoral and would be considered fraud by the courts of Canada and Mexico.
He also said that First Majestic intended to enter into discussions with Grupo to purchase Bolanos on similar terms as in the draft agreement with Mr. Davila. Mr. Neumeyer asked Mr. Martinez not to forward the email to Mr. Davila. Mr. Martinez did not respond to the email.
92  On September 18 there was a board meeting of First Majestic at which Bolanos was discussed. The Board decided to try to reach an agreement with Mr. Davila.
93  On September 25, 2006, Mr. Davila, Mr. Neumeyer and Ramon met in Mexico. It was a heated meeting and no accord was reached. It ended with Mr. Davila threatening to sue First Majestic for having stymied the deal with Grupo. Following the meeting there was an exchange of emails discussing possible terms of a deal for First Silver to acquire Bolanos and process Mr. Davila's tailings for a fee. No arrangement was concluded and the last email was from Mr. Davila to Mr. Neumeyer on November 6, 2006. Neither party heard from the other after that.
94  On November 7, 2006, Ramon called Mr. Martinez to tell him that First Silver had not had any communication with Mr. Davila. Mr. Martinez said that his position remained the same: if there was no agreement between First Silver and Mr. Davila they would not proceed with a sale. Mr. Martinez told Ramon that Mr. Davila was sending him information in an attempt to convince Mr. Martinez that Mr. Davila had the right to Bolanos. Ramon reported on the meeting in an email to Mr. Neumeyer:
I spoke with Remigio Martinez (Grupo Mexico) he told me that they are in the same position waiting for a resolution on the situation with Hector Davila and FR they have not taken any action until we define what is going to happen. He is telling me that Hector keeps sending information telling him that we (FR) gave him the right to get the Bolanos mine. I told him that so far we have not reached an agreement with him and that we are still negotiating.
95  On November 15, 2006 Bolanos was discussed at a First Majestic board meeting. The minutes of the meeting record:
Discussion ensued on the status of a potential acquisition of the Bolanos project which a former director and officer of First Silver Reserve Inc. ("First Silver") is also attempting to acquire. The directors agreed that management should monitor the status of the negotiations between the vendor (Grupo Mexico) and the former director and officer of First Silver. Mr. Scott recommended that the Company document its position and that the former director and officer of First Silver be placed on notice that in his capacity as President and CEO, he was directed to make an offer to acquire the Bolanos project on behalf of First Silver but did not do so. Mr. Neumeyer agreed to contact legal counsel about drafting this letter and bring it back to the board for further discussion at the December board meeting.
96  Mr. Young was at the meeting and was questioned on it. He did not have any independent recollection apart from notes, which he took for his own use. They state, in part, that Mr. Neumeyer suggested "FR [First Majestic] sit back and watch" and that the position of the Board at that time was "we do nothing for the present time". Mr. Young also noted that "Grupo cannot sell without being sued - it probably 'won't go anywhere.'"
97  In January 2007 there were two visits by First Majestic's operations director, Sergio Ramirez, and other First Majestic personnel to the Bolanos property, approximately two weeks apart. On the first visit Mr. Ramirez went with two El Pilon employees who had previously been involved in a review of Bolanos. The information that was reviewed included metallurgical studies, samplings, and information on the main targets within Bolanos.
98  The second visit occurred approximately two weeks later. This time Mr. Ramirez came with two engineers, Florentino Munoz and Ricardo Flores. They drove around the site on their own.
99  In March 2007, Ramon met with the president of Grupo - Xavier Garcia - and Mr. Martinez. Ramon said he told them that First Majestic was trying to reach an agreement with Mr. Davila to do a joint venture and get the Bolanos property. That meeting was reported to the board on March 15 by Mr. Neumeyer. The minutes state:
GRUPO MEXICO - B[o]lanos Update
Mr. Neumeyer provided an update on Grupo Mexico. Mr. Davila met with the President of Grupo Mexico at a mining show in Durango. The President advised that the matter of Bolanos continues to be a problem as the company has difficulty with the mine being sold to either of Mr. Hector Davila Santos or First Majestic. He suggested that a joint venture agreement may provide a solution in respect to B[o]lanos as this may prevent any legal dispute in the future. Mr. Davila met with the Vice President of Bolanos in Mexico City at which time the VP offered the sale of two other mines to First Majestic; one consisting of 7 million tonnes of high grade ore with a 1,500 tpd mill onsite and the other with 20 million ounces silver resource which is located close to the Company's Perservencia Silver Mine Project.
100  Under cross-examination, Mr. Davila said that at some point it appeared to him that First Majestic had stopped interfering in his purchase of Bolanos. He had not heard from First Majestic. And, he said, he asked Mr. Martinez whether he had heard anything further from First Majestic, to which Mr. Martinez replied in the negative.
101  Mr. Davila said that negotiations between him and Grupo for the acquisition of Bolanos started up again in April 2007.
102  On May 15, 2007 First Majestic made a payment of approximately <damage type = "other">$13.5 million</damage> to Mr. Davila, pursuant to the terms of the share purchase agreement and the promissory note.
103  On June 13, 2007 Ramon wrote Mr. Martinez seeking "to up-date my information on the Bolanos situation" at a meeting they were scheduling at the time. The meeting was cancelled because of a scheduling conflict.
104  On June 14, 2007 Mr. Davila sent a letter to Mr. Martinez for the purchase of the Bolanos property by Minera Arroyo. Unlike the previous offers made by Arroyo, this offer provided for an immediate cash payment of US <damage type = "other">$12 million</damage> for the purchase of the shares of MMM as well as the transfer of some mining leases. In addition, there was a provision for guaranteed royalties of US <damage type = "other">$6 million</damage>. On August 7, 2007, the parties signed a final agreement for that transaction.
105  Ramon learned of the transaction in August 2007.
106  This action was commenced on November 30, 2007, with First Majestic and First Silver as the plaintiffs. On December 7, First Silver assigned all of its rights, titles, and interests in all of its property and assets to First Majestic. This expressly included its rights pursuant to any litigation or proceeds thereof with respect to the Bolanos property.
107  First Majestic ceased making payments due to Mr. Davila under the terms of the share purchase agreement and the promissory note, including the final payment of principal of approximately <damage type = "other">$13.3 million</damage> due on May 30, 2008.
108  On November 24, 2008, the defendants' counsel wrote the plaintiffs' counsel offering to settle the litigation. The offer was made "with prejudice" and its thrust was an offer to sell the mine to the plaintiffs. The offer was rejected on November 28. The defendants rely on this as a basis for their failure to mitigate plea. I will deal with the terms of the offer when I address that defence; for now I will only point out that the offer expired on November 28, 2008.
109  Mr. Davila partially refurbished the mill in order to process his tailings. In addition, he began refurbishment of some of the mines, but these had not been brought into production at the time of the trial.
 III.  IS MR. DAVILA LIABLE FOR BREACH OF FIDUCIARY DUTY TO FIRST SILVER? 
110  As set out in the introduction, First Majestic's claim is made as assignee of First Silver's rights of action. As assignee it stands in the shoes of First Silver. In this section, I therefore analyse the potential liability of the defendants to First Silver. That said, the actions and knowledge of First Majestic are, depending on the time-frame in issue, relevant to the claims of First Silver because after the takeover the managing minds of the companies became one and the same. Further, the financial capacity of First Majestic to fund a possible purchase of Bolanos is relevant since, as will be seen, after the takeover it would reasonably have been expected to participate directly or indirectly in the purchase.
111  As a director of First Silver, Mr. Davila was its fiduciary. The leading Canadian case on the fiduciary duties of directors with respect to an opportunity of the directors' company is Canadian Aero Service Ltd. v. O'Malley, . The case has been cited and analysed frequently. It stands for the following propositions:
directors are fiduciaries for their company;
they are precluded from obtaining any business opportunity belonging to the company or for which the company has been negotiating;
they may only so do so with the authorization of the company which must be obtained after full disclosure of the facts;
this obligation continues after the resignation of the director "where the resignation may fairly be said to have been prompted or influenced by a wish to acquire for himself the opportunity sought by the company, or where it was his position with the company rather than a fresh initiative that led him to the opportunity which he later acquired." (at p. 607)
112  Laskin J. (as he then was) referred to the obligation as a "strict ethic". At p. 607 he pointed out that the obligation is to be assessed in the context of all of the relevant facts, including the factor of time.
 A.  Was Bolanos First Silver's opportunity - the Fossv. Harbottle argument 
113  This action was originally commenced by First Silver and, as assignee of First Silver's claim, First Majestic. Relatively close to the trial date scheduled for February 2011 (which had already been adjourned once) the defendants applied to amend their claim to add a plea that the only company which could have suffered a loss with regard to the opportunity to acquire Bolanos was El Pilon. Therefore, First Silver had no cause of action. A related amendment sought was a plea that El Pilon's claims were governed by Mexican law. The plaintiffs contested the motion and argued that they should be allowed to add El Pilon as a plaintiff if I allowed the amendment.
114  I allowed all of the requested amendments: see . The trial was subsequently adjourned to allow for further discoveries.
115  The defendants base their argument on the rule in Foss v. Harbottle, which stands for the proposition that, prima facie, the shareholders of a corporation cannot sue for a wrong done to the company; rather, only the company may sue for the loss. The principle itself is non-controversial. The question is whether it applies in the circumstances of this case.
116  The starting point of the analysis must be to determine whether Bolanos was an opportunity of First Silver or El Pilon. As the defendants concede, if the opportunity belonged to First Silver, that puts an end to the Foss v. Harbottle argument. For the purposes of this section I will assume that Bolanos was a corporate opportunity of either First Silver or El Pilon. The defendants say that it was not a corporate opportunity of either party. I will address that argument later.
117  The facts set out above show:
The initial approach by Mr. Davila on November 3, 2004, while on El Pilon letterhead, was stated to be "in representation of First Silver Reserve Inc." (above, para. 20). This was followed by the December 13, 2004 letter (above, para. 22) in which Mr. Davila said that "our company" gave him authorization to purchase Bolanos. While on El Pilon letterhead, it was signed by Mr. Davila on behalf of both companies.
Reports and deliberations continually took place at the level of the First Silver board. The board approved the pursuit of Bolanos. Conversely, there was no discussion about Bolanos at the El Pilon board level, or its Mexican equivalent.
Representatives of First Silver visited Bolanos in order to assess its viability. This included Mr. Young, a director of First Silver.
The board of First Silver authorised the payment by it of a <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage> deposit to Grupo (above, para. 30).
The April 4, 2006 cancellation letter authored by Mr. Davila (above, para. 56) once again used the phrase: "As the representative of MINERA EL PILON, S.A. DE C.V. and FIRST SILVER RESERVE, INC." and the letter revoked prior "offers and negotiations" on behalf of both those companies.
118  Mr. Davila thought that First Silver was a potential purchaser of Bolanos. Not only are there the two letters referred to in the preceding paragraph, but in his March 17, 2006 letter to Grupo (above, para. 36), Mr. Ibarra, no doubt on Mr. Davila's instructions, asked that Mr. Davila be named as a buyer in addition to First Silver. At a First Silver board meeting on January 23, 2006 Mr. Davila told the board that IMMSA (Grupo's subsidiary) could not sell Bolanos to anyone else because, according to the minutes "a letter of intent had been signed with First Silver". Mr. Davila stated that in his view, whoever bought his First Silver shares would have the "first crack" to buy Bolanos. He also said that if the share purchase transaction did not close, First Silver would be "reinstated" as the holder of the Bolanos option.
119  Further, there is this evidence of Mr. Davila:
 Q:  And when you were the president and CEO and a director of First Silver, you were primarily dealing with the negotiations with Grupo; correct? 
 A: Yes, sir. 
 Q:  And it's fair to say that at that time just like when you were doing the transaction for yourself later, when you were the president and CEO and director of First Silver, negotiating the Bolanos transaction, you would have wanted to structure it in whatever made the most business sense for First Silver; correct? 
 A: Yes, sir. It would depend on lawyers. 
120  Finally, to the extent that it is relevant, there is an inconsistency in the case pleaded by the defendants. Their statement of defence relies on the alleged fact that First Silver turned down the possibility of pursuing Bolanos, thereby allowing Mr. Davila free reign to buy it. Nowhere does the defence say that El Pilon refused to pursue Bolanos.
121  The defendants argue:
... while it might, hypothetically, have been possible to structure the acquisition of the Bolanos Property differently in 2006, the evidence establishes that the structure which was actually chosen at that time was an asset purchase by El Pilon. In applying the rule in Foss v. Harbottle to the facts of this case, the Court is not concerned with events which could have happened, but which did not. The Court is not concerned with things which the Plaintiffs now say they could have done (given that they seek to have a claim to the Bolanos property to be advanced by First Silver). The Court is concerned with determining which juridical person was to receive rights to the Bolanos property, on the facts which actually occurred. Those facts demonstrate that El Pilon, not First Silver, was to be the owner of the Bolanos property in the deal that was actually being negotiated with Grupo Mexico during the time in which Davila Santos was a principal of El Pilon and First Silver.
I think this misses the point in several ways. First, the deal was not finalised in 2006. A contract with Grupo was not signed and Mr. Davila continued to request changes as to who was to be named as a purchaser. Second, it conflates the possible corporate structure of a transaction with the entity that has the right to take advantage of the opportunity.
122  All of the above leads inexorably to the conclusion that the Bolanos opportunity was First Silver's, to be exercised through whatever means it and Grupo chose. The fact that El Pilon was also referred to as a potential purchaser and that correspondence in the middle of the time-line was on its letterhead does not detract from this. At most it would show that the opportunity belonged to both El Pilon and First Silver, something not argued by the parties and that would have no significance to First Silver's claim.
123  The rule in Foss v. Harbottle is therefore not engaged here. As stated on numerous occasions, most recently by the Court of Appeal in Mayer v. Osborne,  at para. 106, Foss v. Harbottle does not apply to a cause of action that belongs personally to a shareholder himself. This is not a case where a shareholder is suing for a wrong done to its subsidiary. Rather, the fiduciary duty was owed by Mr. Davila to First Silver. Putting aside for the moment all of the other arguments raised in Mr. Davila's defence, his unauthorized acquisition of Bolanos would be a breach of that duty. The fact that another company or entity may have been involved in executing the deal does not negate that.
124  Having reached that conclusion, it is unnecessary for me to consider whether El Pilon has a claim and the issues of Mexican law.
 B.  Was Bolanos a corporate opportunity at all? 
125  The defendants submit that Bolanos was not a corporate opportunity because the fact that it was available for purchase was known in the mining industry in March and April 2006 and there is nothing in the discussions involving First Silver and Grupo Mexico during that period which rendered that opportunity particular to First Silver.
126  The defendants cite no authority for this proposition other than the general statement from Canadian Aero, at p. 620, that in determining whether there has been a breach of fiduciary duty the court must take into account the "nature of the corporate opportunity, its ripeness, its specificness".
127  The proposition that a potential acquisition cannot be a corporate opportunity because its existence was known in the business community imports into the cause of action a requirement that the opportunity be confidential or a trade secret. This was rejected in Canadian Aero when Laskin J. said, at p. 615:
The view taken by the trial judge, and affirmed by the Court of Appeal (which quoted the same passage from the reasons of Lord Russell of Killowen in Regal (Hastings) Ltd. v. Gulliver, [1942] 1 All E.R. 378), tended to obscure the difference between the survival of fiduciary duty after resignation and the right to use non-confidential information acquired in the course of employment and as a result of experience. I do not see that either the question of the confidentiality of the information acquired by O'Malley and Zarzycki in the course of their work for Canaero on the Guyana project or the question of copyright is relevant to the enforcement against them of a fiduciary duty. The fact that breach of confidence or violation of copyright may itself afford a ground of relief does not make either one a necessary ingredient of a successful claim for breach of fiduciary duty.
128  The argument also ignores that - as also made clear in Canadian Aero - a director commits a breach of fiduciary duty when he puts his interest in conflict with that of the company. That is so regardless of whether the subject matter of the conflict is confidential.
129  Mr. Davila had a great deal of knowledge about Bolanos because of his prior ownership of it. First Silver was entitled to the benefit of that knowledge, especially since Mr. Davila saw fit to have First Silver pursue it. It was not up to him to unilaterally decide to take it for himself.
130  I will address the time span of Mr. Davila's fiduciary obligations in relation to Bolanos and whether Bolanos remained an opportunity of First Silver later. For the present, I conclude that Bolanos was a corporate opportunity of First Silver starting at least in November 2004 when Mr. Davila wrote to Grupo expressing interest in its acquisition (above, para. 20).
 C.  Did Mr. Davila breach his fiduciary duty when he sent the April 4, 2006 letter to Grupo? 
131  In his letter of April 4, 2006 (above, para. 56) Mr. Davila, while still a director of First Silver, cancelled "all prior purchase offers and negotiations". The letter said that he was doing this on behalf of both El Pilon and First Silver. This section addresses whether Mr. Davila breached his fiduciary duty to First Silver when he sent this letter.
132  Whether Mr. Davila breached his fiduciary duty when he sent this letter is in some ways non-consequential because the real alleged harm to First Silver occurred later when Mr. Davila acquired Bolanos. Nevertheless, this letter and surrounding conduct was argued by the plaintiffs to be a breach. Furthermore, it is useful to analyse whether a duty existed at this time because the defendants place so much emphasis on the time frame in regard to whether a duty existed and if so, for how long.
133  Mr. Davila testified that he felt free to send the letter and pursue Bolanos on his own because at the April 3, 2006 meeting, Mr. Neumeyer told him that First Majestic was not interested in acquiring Bolanos. A constant refrain in his evidence was "they didn't want it". He took that as a rejection on behalf of First Silver because First Majestic would be acquiring control of it.
134  I do not accede to that either factually or legally.
135  From a factual point of view, I do not accept that Mr. Neumeyer or Ramon rejected Bolanos at the April 3 meeting. I find their version of the events at this and the March 27 meeting - including their version of when the contract was prepared and discussed with Mr. Davila - to be more credible than Mr. Davila's. One reason amongst others for this conclusion is that Mr. Davila, as he acknowledged, did not mention the price for Bolanos at the meeting. It does not make sense that First Majestic would reject it out of hand without inquiring about the price. Mr. Neumeyer's note of the April 20 meeting shows that he was inquiring about the price at that time. If he had rejected the opportunity earlier, why would he be discussing the price at a later point?
136  But perhaps more telling, even Mr. Davila's own version of the April 3 meeting does not support a characterisation that Bolanos had been rejected. As I said (above, para. 50), the call between him and Mr. Neumeyer ended with Mr. Neumeyer saying he "would think of something". That is not a rejection; rather, that clearly meant that the matter would be considered further and revisited.
137  From a juridical point of view, what Mr. Neumeyer might have said is irrelevant since he could not speak on behalf of First Silver at the time.
138  At the time this letter was sent, the state of affairs with respect to First Silver and Bolanos was that the board had authorised the pursuit of Bolanos. On March 31, Mr. Davila had emailed Mr. Fahey that Grupo was preparing the contract and, "We should be signing next week or so" (above, para. 48). The Board of First Silver had not formally or informally rejected Bolanos. The most that could be said in Mr. Davila's favour was that the board had left it open for Mr. Davila to acquire Bolanos if they decided not to go ahead with it.
139  Both the intent and effect of the letter was that Mr. Davila ended any negotiations between First Silver and Grupo so that he could pursue Bolanos on his own.
140  The only conclusion that can be reached on this evidence is that Mr. Davila breached his fiduciary duty to First Silver by sending the April 4 letter. In reaching this conclusion I do not think I need decide whether there was a binding agreement with Grupo at the time and neither party argued that anything hinged on this.
 D.  Did Mr. Davila breach his fiduciary duty to First Silver when he indirectly acquired Bolanos in August 2007? 
141  Mr. Davila's company acquired Bolanos in August 2007. He had not been a director of First Silver since June 2006. This is the crucial alleged breach of fiduciary duty because it was his acquisition that crystallised First Silver's claimed loss, in that it then became impossible for it to acquire Bolanos. (This ignores the defendants' failure to mitigate argument which I address separately.)
142  The plaintiffs argue that Mr. Davila's fiduciary obligation not to deal with Bolanos continued up to the time he acquired it.
143  The defendants say that there was no breach of fiduciary duty because, to quote from their written argument:
there was no ongoing fiduciary duty which prevented [Mr. Davila] from seeking to acquire the Bolanos Property after he ceased to be a director of First Silver;
...
even if there was an ongoing fiduciary duty imposed on [Mr. Davila] after resignation, that fiduciary duty had expired by August 2007; and
to the extent that the acquisition of the Bolanos Property was ever a corporate opportunity belonging to First Silver, it was no longer such an opportunity by August 2007.
144  In the analysis that follows, when I refer to the conversations with Mr. Martinez of Grupo, I am not accepting them for the truth of their contents (i.e. truth of what Grupo's position may actually have been); rather, they are taken to show what the parties understood Grupo's position was regarding Bolanos, which is the relevant issue.
 1.  Did Mr. Davila's fiduciary obligation extend until August 2007? 
145  I will address points (a) and (c) of the defendants' submissions together. The starting point of the defendants' argument is the passage from Canadian Aero (above, para. 111) in which Laskin J. referred to the obligation of a fiduciary surviving after his resignation where "the resignation may fairly be said to have been prompted or influenced by a wish to acquire for himself the opportunity sought by the company, or where it was his position with the company rather than a fresh initiative that led him to the opportunity which he later acquired." The defendants also emphasize that Laskin J. referred to the factor of time as one of the relevant factors in determining the duration of a director's obligation not to pursue a corporate opportunity.
146  The defendants then refer to CRC-Evans Canada Ltd. v. Pettifer, No.  (Q.B.), aff'd No. . That case dealt with fiduciary employees who, after they left the plaintiff's employment, set up a competing business and solicited the plaintiff's clients. The court arrived at the duration of the fiduciary obligation by using the period of notice to which the defendants would be entitled had they been dismissed without cause.
147  In CRC-Evans the use of an employment notice period was expressly based on having to balance on-going non-solicitation obligations against the competing interest of a former employee being able to ply his trade without being captive to a former employer (para. 65 of the trial judgment). It is similar to the issues that the courts deal with in construing non-competition agreements signed by employees. The concern in those situations is not applicable to a corporate opportunity case, which involves a single business deal appropriated by a director and does not involve the same policy considerations.
148  The defendants also referred to a number of cases in which interlocutory injunctions were granted against former employees, for example TCT Logistics Inc. v. Nordeen, . For the same reason, I also find that line of reasoning to be inapplicable. Further, an interlocutory injunction is granted on a low evidentiary threshold for a limited period because the plaintiff is expected to prove its case in full at trial and to move as quickly as possible to that trial. An interlocutory injunction is meant to preserve the status quo pending the trial and is generally not granted where it would put an end to an issue by effectively granting the plaintiff its full relief. The considerations for determining liability in a trial judgment, or even granting a permanent injunction after a trial, are completely different.
149  The passage of time in and of itself cannot be determinative of whether a former director can take advantage of a corporate opportunity - it is one factor amongst many that may be taken into account. Some of those other factors are raised in other parts of the defendants' argument, which I deal with separately.
 2.  Was Bolanos still First Silver's corporate opportunity in August 2007? 
150  I will now address point (d) of the defendants' submissions. The defendants argue that a fiduciary is only precluded from pursuing a "maturing business opportunity" that the company is "actively pursuing". Bolanos, they say, was neither for First Silver. In essence, this submission is based on the fact that First Silver had not made an offer to acquire Bolanos by August 2007.
151  The concept of a maturing business opportunity was addressed by Sigurdson J. in Pan Pacific Recycling Inc. v. So, . He commented:
[174] In Canadian Aero the court referred to a fiduciary taking for himself a "maturing business opportunity which his company is actively pursuing". Other cases, such as Alnor Services Ltd. v. Sawyer  (B.C. S.C.) and Cranewood Financial Corp. v. Norisawa, ,  (B.C.S.C.), refer to "ripening business opportunities".
[175] To the extent that these terms suggest that fiduciaries are only barred from taking opportunities that the corporation is actively pursuing, they are probably misleading. The question of whether a fiduciary has breached his duty by taking a particular opportunity is a question of fact that can turn on many factors, some of which are set out by Laskin J. in Canadian Aero at p. 620
152  I agree with that observation. It must be emphasized that corporate opportunity cases are cases of alleged breaches of fiduciary duty, and fiduciaries are put to a strict standard. It follows that the court should be cautious in determining that something which was initially a corporate opportunity ceased to be such because, according to the fiduciary, the company was not pursuing it with sufficient alacrity. That is quite a different situation than the company having affirmatively turned down an opportunity. To put the matter more generally, a fiduciary should not be entitled to second-guess the manner in which his company is pursuing an opportunity. I come back to this principle (below, para. 270), in the context of the defendants' mitigation arguments.
153  In the case at bar, First Silver had not determined it was not interested in Bolanos, nor had it indicated that to Grupo. In fact, the situation was quite the opposite. Having asserted both to Grupo and Mr. Davila that the Bolanos opportunity belonged to First Silver, First Majestic (and therefore First Silver) decided to monitor the situation and focus on concluding the Quebradillas deal with Grupo while "monitoring" the situation. That is not tantamount to a decision to abandon the opportunity.
154  I conclude that Bolanos remained a corporate opportunity of First Silver. The time factor considerations are left to be considered in the context of causation, mitigation and the defendants' affirmative defences.
E. Affirmative defences
155  The defendants raise the following affirmative defences:
a. estoppel by convention;
b. waiver;
c. acquiescence;
d. estoppel; and
e. the "clean hands" doctrine.
156  The defendants argue that these defences apply to First Silver's claims, although, as acknowledged by the defendants, they are largely based on the conduct of First Majestic prior to the closing of the share purchase agreement on May 30, 2006. The defendants say they are entitled to succeed on this basis because the operating minds of First Majestic became officers and directors of El Pilon on May 31, 2006; they assumed operational control of First Silver as of June 1, 2006; and they became officers and directors of First Silver on June 19, 2006.
157  I will address each of the defences discretely, but I will say here that I do not agree with the overriding point that the conduct of First Majestic's personnel prior to its takeover of First Silver can be advanced in defence of First Silver's claims. The companies were unrelated and had separate boards. It is no doubt the case, and not disputed, that after the takeover the operating minds became the same, but that does not have retroactive effect, whether legally or factually.
158  Insofar as the assignment is concerned, as assignee First Majestic is subject to the defences which may be raised against First Silver, not the other way around.
1. Estoppel by convention
159  The Supreme Court of Canada dealt with estoppel by convention in Ryan v. Moore, . Bastarache J. delivered the judgment of the court and set out the following criteria, at para. 59:
... After having reviewed the jurisprudence in the United Kingdom and Canada as well as academic comments on the subject, I am of the view that the following criteria form the basis of the doctrine of estoppel by convention:
The parties' dealings must have been based on a shared assumption of fact or law: estoppel requires manifest representation by statement or conduct creating a mutual assumption. Nevertheless, estoppel can arise out of silence (impliedly).
A party must have conducted itself, i.e. acted, in reliance on such shared assumption, its actions resulting in a change of its legal position.
It must also be unjust or unfair to allow one of the parties to resile or depart from the common assumption. The party seeking to establish estoppel therefore has to prove that detriment will be suffered if the other party is allowed to resile from the assumption since there has been a change from the presumed position.
I will deal with each of these.
a) Shared assumption
160  The defendants say the shared assumption was that the parties to the share purchase agreement, namely First Majestic and Mr. Davila, believed the opportunity to acquire Bolanos "was not part of the deal"; in other words, the opportunity to acquire Bolanos did not belong to First Silver.
161  Juridically, as set out in the previous section, I do not think that this defence, which is based on the conduct, knowledge or lack of knowledge of First Majestic before the takeover, can be raised against First Silver. After the takeover, the knowledge and conduct of First Majestic becomes the same as First Silver's since the operating minds of both are the same.
162  Factually, I do not think there was a shared assumption regarding Bolanos. Mr. Davila did not assume that it was his opportunity; rather, he knew it was First Silver's. The following excerpt from his evidence is sufficient to show that:
 Q:  So at the moment you meet with Ramon Davila at the time that meeting begins on April 3rd, 2006, it's First Silver that has the option to acquire the Bolanos property, not Hector Davila Santos personally; correct? 
 A: Correct, sir. 
 Q:  And if -- and if you had not said anything at all about Bolanos on April 3rd, 2006, if First Majestic became the majority owner of First Silver one of the things that would be acquired, as insofar as it was the majority owner, was FSR's option to pursue the Bolanos property; correct? 
 A: Correct, sir. 
 Q:  So you'll agree with me that when you -- you agree with me that when you met with Ramon Davila on April 3rd, 2006, it's First Silver's option, not Hector Davila Santos personally; correct? We've already talked about that? 
 A: Okay. Yes, sir. 
163  Turning to Mr. Neumeyer, up to the time of the closing of the share purchase agreement, he did not believe or assume that Bolanos was not First Silver's opportunity. His suspicions were raised and he intended to investigate the matter further. And if he did mistakenly believe that the opportunity was Mr. Davila's personally, this arose in whole or in part from Mr. Davila having misrepresented that this was so. It cannot be the case that a defendant can raise an equitable defence based on his own misconduct.
b) Detrimental reliance
164  In Ryan, Bastarache J. explained the requirements of detrimental reliance:
Detrimental reliance encompasses two distinct, but interrelated, concepts: reliance and detriment. The former requires a finding that the party seeking to establish the estoppel changed his or her course of conduct by acting or abstaining from acting in reliance upon the assumption, thereby altering his or her legal position. If the first step is met, the second requires a finding that, should the other party be allowed to abandon the assumption, detriment will be suffered by the estoppel raiser because of the change from his or her assumed position....
165  The defendants point to two things they say amount to detrimental reliance. I quote from their written argument:
Davila Santos entered into the Share Purchase Agreement for a purchase price which did not reflect the value of an interest in the Bolanos property (beyond the right of first refusal) as an asset included in the deal;
Davila Santos was lulled into closing the Share Purchase Agreement on the understanding that any issue regarding his right to pursue the Bolanos property had been resolved by his meeting with Mr. Neumeyer on April 20, 2006, and Mr. Neuemeyer's [sic ] subsequent "strategic" communications.
166  With respect to the value of the shares, there is no evidence to show that the shares of First Silver would have had a greater value if the Bolanos opportunity was knowingly included. One thing is certain: First Silver did not own Bolanos. There is no evidence as to what value an option (if the legal state of affairs between Grupo and First Silver at the time could have been called that) was worth. Further, there is no evidence to show that Mr. Davila even thought about asking for a higher price for his shares. He said:
 Q:  I am not asking about when it was in production. I am just asking you that as of April 4th, 2006, did you have the view that the trading price of the shares of First Silver would rise if First Silver acquired the Bolanos property, either directly or through a subsidiary company? 
 A: No. 
 Q:  Okay. When you signed the share purchase agreement on April 3rd, 2006, you were aware that the purchase price of your shares was being determined on the basis of the 10-day average trading price of the common shares of First Silver prior to execution of the April 3rd agreement? 
 A: Yes, sir. 
and:
 Q:  And so if First Majestic had told you on April 3rd, 2006, that it wanted to complete the acquisition of Bolanos, that didn't mean they were going to be paying you any more for your shares; correct? 
 A: That's correct, sir. 
167  I turn to the second aspect of the defendants' reliance argument quoted above, namely Mr. Davila having been lulled into thinking that the Bolanos issue had been resolved at the April 20, 2006 meeting with Mr. Neumeyer. The simple answer is that there was not a full and frank discussion of the situation, in large part because of Mr. Davila not having been forthright. He cannot benefit from that. Further, Mr. Neumeyer's conduct at that time could not affect First Silver's rights.
168  Moreover, the key time both for this defence and the case in general is when Mr. Davila acquired Bolanos in August 2007. In spite of all that had taken place between Mr. Davila's meeting with Mr. Neumeyer on April 3, 2006 and August 2007, Mr. Davila based his actions on the April 3 meeting. He said:
 Q:  Your attitude from April 4th, 2006 to September 2006, was that Bolanos was none of First Majestic's business; correct? 
 A: Correct, sir. 
 Q:  You didn't care what they thought; correct? They had refused the project on April 3rd. That was your attitude? 
 A: That's correct, sir. 
 Q:  What you represented to First Majestic on April 3rd, 2006, was that you personally were in a position to sell Bolanos to them. You wanted to sell Bolanos and your tailings as a package to First Majestic; correct? 
 A: That's correct, sir. 
and:
 Q:  You never obtained the informed consent from First Silver to allow you to take the Bolanos Mine for yourself at any time after September 2006? 
 A:  Correct, sir. I was basing my actions on April 3rd the fact that they refused the property. They didn't want it. That's what they expressed to me. They didn't want to hear about it. 
169  That is not credible. I do not accept that at that time Mr. Davila actually thought the Bolanos issue was resolved with First Silver or First Majestic. And even if he did have that belief, there was no reasonable basis for it. No matter what occurred at the April 20 meeting, at the meeting of September 20, 2006, Mr. Neumeyer made it clear that he was asserting First Silver's right to Bolanos (above, para. 93). That position was stated with sufficient clarity for Mr. Davila to threaten to sue First Majestic. There was nothing that occurred after that that could be taken for a change in position.
c) Unfairness
170  In view of my findings on the first two prongs of the test, it is unnecessary for me to determine the third prong, unfairness.
2. Waiver
171  Waiver occurs where a party, with full knowledge of his legal rights, communicates to the other an unequivocal and conscious intention to abandon them: Saskatchewan River Bungalows Ltd. v. Maritime Life Assurance Co., .
172  As with their estoppel argument, the defendants base the waiver defence against First Silver's claim on the conduct of First Majestic. I concluded (above, para. 157) that First Majestic's conduct prior to its acquisition of First Silver cannot raise defences to First Silver's claims.
173  Moreover, in Saskatchewan River Bungalows, the court referred to the test for waiver as being a stringent one, since no consideration for the waiver is required. First Majestic did not decide to abandon any claims. Nor, for that matter did First Silver.
174  Finally, the "communication" of the abandonment argued by the defendants amounts to silence: First Majestic, in the face of its perceived claim against Mr. Davila, closed the share transaction and then made payments to him for his shares. That is not enough.
175  The issue of silence in a similar context was dealt with in this litigation in an amendment application. The defendants applied to amend their Statement of Defence to include a similar plea relating to the failure of First Majestic to refer to the plaintiffs' potential claim to Bolanos or against Mr. Davila in the materials filed in support of its application for the approval by the court of the plan of arrangement. I did not allow the amendment and the defendants appealed. The Court of Appeal () said, at para. 32:
While the unequivocal intention to relinquish a right may be inferred from the conduct of a party, it cannot reasonably be inferred from silence, without more.
3. Acquiescence
176  The Supreme Court of Canada dealt with acquiescence in M. (K.) v. M. (H.), No. . La Forest J. said, at para. 100:
Acquiescence is a fluid term, susceptible to various meanings depending upon the context in which it is used. Meagher, Gummow and Lehane, supra, at pp. 765-66, identify three different senses, the first being a synonym for estoppel, wherein the plaintiff stands by and watches the deprivation of her rights and yet does nothing. This has been referred to as the primary meaning of acquiescence. Its secondary sense is as an element of laches -- after the deprivation of her rights and in the full knowledge of their existence, the plaintiff delays. This leads to an inference that her rights have been waived. This, of course, is the meaning of acquiescence relevant to this appeal. The final usage is a confusing one, as it is sometimes associated with the second branch of the laches rule in the context of an alteration of the defendant's position in reliance on the plaintiff's inaction.
At para. 101, La Forest J. addressed the question of knowledge and said that it was not sufficient for the plaintiff to have knowledge of the facts that might give rise to a cause of action; it must also have knowledge that the facts give rise to a claim.
177  There is a residual requirement that La Forest J. laid out, at para. 104:
... in light of the plaintiff's knowledge, can it reasonably be inferred that the plaintiff has acquiesced in the defendant's conduct? That question depends on the circumstances of each case....
178  The defendants argue that the plaintiffs were fully aware of both the relevant facts and that they gave rise to a claim by April 20, 2006, but chose not to commence legal action.
179  When did First Majestic become aware of the potential cause of action? I found (above, para. 69) that First Majestic did not receive the minutes of the First Silver January 23, 2006 board meeting until the end of July, 2006. These minutes contain crucial information relating to First Silver's position regarding Bolanos and therefore this claim. When dealing with the issue of estoppel by convention, I concluded that at the time of the closing of the share transaction, Mr. Neumeyer had suspicions regarding Bolanos but not full knowledge (above, para. 163). Therefore First Majestic did not have full knowledge of the facts giving rise to a claim until the beginning of August, 2006.
180  At that point, Mr. Davila had already sent his letter of April 4, 2006 purporting to revoke all prior negotiations regarding Bolanos. The next crucial time was August 2007, when Mr. Davila signed the contract with Grupo for the purchase of Bolanos. First Majestic had no prior advice that would happen. By this time, Mr. Davila had been told of First Majestic's position regarding Bolanos, and both Mr. Davila and Ramon had been told by Grupo that they would not sell to either party. Under these circumstances I do not see how it can reasonably be inferred that First Majestic had acquiesced to the wrongdoing.
181  Once again, I have been addressing the allegation that it is First Majestic's knowledge and conduct that is at issue. However, for the sake of completeness, I will address the issue vis-à-vis First Silver. Before the takeover of First Majestic, First Silver was not aware of what Mr. Davila had done, and in particular of his letter of April 4, 2006. Therefore there can be no basis for an acquiescence defence to apply to First Silver. After the takeover, First Silver's and First Majestic's knowledge may be taken as being the same because of the interlocking management and directorships. My comments and conclusions in the prior paragraph regarding First Majestic also apply to First Silver.
4. Estoppel
182  Where a party, by words or conduct, represents that a particular state of affairs exists or otherwise makes a promise or assurance, and the other party relies on that representation such that it would be unfair or unjust to permit it to resile from that representation, it will be estopped from doing so: Litwin Construction (1973) Ltd. v. Pan  (C.A.) at 99.
183  The defendants argue that First Majestic is estopped from taking the position that Bolanos was an asset of First Silver because it closed the share purchase agreement after having formed the view that Mr. Davila's conduct was fraudulent, and it did not raise the issue of Bolanos until September 2006. The defendants acknowledge that their estoppel argument mirrors that made in relation to estoppel by convention and waiver. My conclusion here must be the same as I reached for those defences for similar reasons.
5. Unclean hands
184  The factual underpinning of this defence is largely the same as for the other defences. The defendants say:
With respect to First Silver's claim for breach of fiduciary duty (assigned to First Majestic), the evidence shows that First Silver, with full knowledge of the background of its dealings relating to the Bolanos Property and with full knowledge of Davila Santos' actions with respect to the Bolanos Property, chose to remain silent, for tactical reasons.
and:
In short, First Majestic maintained a strategy of deceiving Davila Santos into believing that he had First Majestic's and First Silver's approval to pursue the Bolanos acquisition, so that First Majestic could complete the Share Purchase Agreement with Davila Santos; acquire another property without complications; and complete the Plan of Arrangement. It was only through completing the Share Purchase Agreement and the Plan of Arrangement that First Majestic is in a position to advance its claims in this action.
185  There are at least two answers to this argument. The first is the finding I have made that prior to the closing of the share transaction First Majestic did not have full knowledge of Mr. Davila's conduct and First Silver had no knowledge at all. There are therefore no unclean hands at that point.
186  Second, between the time that Mr. Davila sold his shares to First Majestic and the time he acquired Bolanos, he was fully aware of First Majestic's position and in fact threatened to sue it for blocking his deal with Grupo. There can therefore be no unclean hands at that point.
 IV.  TIME OF ELECTION OF REMEDIES FOR BREACH OF FIDUCIARY DUTY 
187  The plaintiffs have claimed alternative remedies for breach of fiduciary duty: damages based on the plaintiff's' loss or a remedy based on the defendants' gain. All of the evidence with respect to both claimed remedies was adduced at trial. I had previously dismissed a motion by the defendants to sever the issue of an accounting of profits and to postpone the related discovery largely because this would result in a delay of the trial that had already been adjourned as a result of the defendants being allowed to make a late amendment with respect to the Foss v Harbottle defence: .
188  There is no question that the plaintiffs may elect between two alternative remedies nor is it in issue that the plaintiff may do so after the evidence phase of the trial has ended. However, the plaintiffs sought to push the time for election beyond that; they argued that they are entitled to have the court issue reasons setting out the amounts that would be owing under either alternative and only after that make their election. Further, regarding disgorgement of the defendants' gain, the plaintiffs argued that they were entitled to elect between obtaining ownership of the mine itself or its value and that that decision could similarly deferred.
189  I considered this issue during a scheduled break of several weeks in the argument and determined that the plaintiffs had to make their election before the close of final arguments. Following that the plaintiffs elected to claim equitable compensation based on their loss.
190  These are the reasons for my decision requiring the election.
191  I begin my analysis with a decision of our Court of Appeal upon which the plaintiffs rely heavily, Moore International (Canada) Inc. v. Carter, ; 1984 CarswellBC 267. The plaintiffs point to the following passage from Lambert J.A.'s judgment:
22 I have two further general comments.
23 The first is this. The fiduciary or his accomplice should not be permitted to gain from the breach of the fiduciary's obligation of trust and good faith. So, if their profit is greater than the loss by the former employer, an accounting is a better standard of compensation than damages. But, conversely, the employer should not be penalized for any business ineptitude of the fiduciary or his accomplice. So, if the loss by the employer is greater than the profit of the fiduciary, damages would be the better standard of compensation. It follows that, where the evidence will support a sound assessment based on an accounting of profits and also a sound assessment based on a calculation of loss and where, in the particular circumstances, both remedies are available and both are supported by the pleadings and the evidence, the compensation awarded should be the higher of the two. ...
192  There are two points to note with respect to this passage. First, it must be read in the context of what was before the court from the trial decision, ;  (S.C.). The trial judge rejected the plaintiff's submission that it was entitled to elect the more favourable remedy. After distinguishing the cases relied on by the plaintiff the trial judge said, at para. 151:
In the case at bar I consider that the Court must weigh the alternative methods and determine which affords the more accurate method of assessing the plaintiff's compensation.
193  Second, earlier in his judgment Lambert J.A. stated, at para. 20:
In my opinion the plaintiff is not required to elect one remedy or the other. He may lead evidence of both his own loss and his fiduciary's profit. And the trial judge may then make an award of compensation that is supported by the evidence.
194  Moore did not directly address the issue of the timing of an election and it did not say that the plaintiff was entitled to a ruling on the alternate quantifications. And it is to be noted that the plaintiffs in the case at bar did not ask me to award the higher of the alternate remedies, nor the most appropriate remedy. Rather they reserve the right to elect until after a ruling on the remedy quantifications.
195  A second Court of Appeal decision relied on by the plaintiffs is Tracy v. Instaloans Financial, , specifically the following passage at para. 49, per Newbury J.A.:
... I see no error in the trial judge's conclusion that the plaintiffs need not elect between the two until they are able to make an informed choice...As long as the plaintiffs make their election before final judgment is issued - and the order appealed from is obviously not a final order - it seems to me the defendants can have no objection. ... [Emphasis added]
196  This case does not directly address the issue before me. This is so because the trial judge had ruled in the plaintiff's favour in determining liability and dealt with the available remedies separately. In a separate judgment she determined that the plaintiff could elect between a constructive trust or damages. Furthermore, in a later judgment, another judge ruled that the plaintiff could engage in further discovery to allow it to make an informed election. In short, the court did not engage in the process of determining the ultimate result on either of the options from which the plaintiff was entitled to elect and the process followed contemplated quite the opposite.
197  The underlined portions of the passage quoted above uses two phrases ("able to make an informed choice" and "before final judgment") that have been used in many judgments dealing with the ability of a plaintiff to elect between alternate remedies. What do those phrases mean in this context?
A. "able to make an informed choice"
198  I will deal first with the ability to make an informed choice. This phrase is elucidated in Island Records Ltd. v. Tring International Plc (1995), [1996] 1 W.L.R. 1256 (Eng. Ch. Div.). This case was referred to in Tracy.
199  In Island Records, there was a split trial between liability and remedy. After succeeding at the liability phase of the trial, the plaintiff applied for further discovery, as the plaintiff did in Tracy, in order to obtain information to allow it to make its election. Lightman J. first referred to the election when there is no split trial:
In proceedings in which the plaintiff claims in the alternative damages or an account of profits, the plaintiff may seek and obtain a trial at which will be determined all issues of liability, of the assessment of damages and of calculation of profits. In such a case full discovery will include all documents relevant to the assessment and calculation, and the plaintiff can make an informed election between damages and profits in the course of the trial in the light of the information revealed on discovery and in the evidence at the trial. [Emphasis added]
200  He then went on to consider the issue before him (where the trial was split):
Four principles are clear. First whilst a plaintiff can apply in proceedings in the alternative for damages and an account of profits, he cannot obtain judgment for both: he can only obtain judgment for one or the other: see Neilson v Betts LR5 HL1 and De Vitre v Belts (1873) LR6 HL 319 at 321. Second once judgment has been entered either for damages or an account of profits, any right-of election is lost: any claim to the remedy other than that for which judgment is entered is forever lost: see United Australia v Barclays Bank [1941] AC 1 at 30. Third a party should in general not be required to elect or be found to have elected between remedies unless and until he is able to make an informed choice. A right of election, if it is to be meaningful and not a mere gamble, must embrace the right to readily available information as to his likely entitlement in case of both the two alternative remedies. It is quite unreasonable to require the plaintiff to speculate totally in the dark as to whether or not the sum recoverable by way of damages will exceed that recoverable under an account of profits. In an analogous situation, it has been held unreasonable to require a plaintiff to speculate whether a payment into Court is sufficient to satisfy his claim for damages for infringement of copyright before he has been afforded inspection of the records of sales in the defendants books: see Mate & Son v Samuel Stephen Ltd (1928-1935) Mac CC 257 at 261. Fourth the exercise of the right of election should not be unreasonably delayed to the prejudice of the defendant.
201  After setting out these considerations, Lightman J. came to his conclusion:
In my view, the Court can at the split trial or on any other application for judgment be invited to defer entry of judgment for damages or profits. At this stage the Court may either make no order as to the remedy for infringement (as in the Minnesota case) or (as I would prefer) may grant a declaration that the plaintiff is entitled at his election to judgment for either. The Court may at the same time or thereafter give directions which secure that such information as is available and is reasonably required to enable the plaintiff to make an informed election is made available to him and that the election is made within a reasonable time thereafter. To secure that the plaintiff has the required information, the Court may direct discovery, but if the information is available in some other way (e.g. in an affidavit by the defendant or by way of audited accounts or reports) the Court may hold that the alternative means be adopted. The Court should not be deterred from this course by the fact that the information required may likewise be required on the taking of an account or an assessment. There should be no over lengthy or unnecessarily sophisticated exercise. The plaintiff is not entitled to know exactly the amount of any damages or profits to which he is entitled, but only to such information as the Court considers to be a fair basis in the circumstances of the particular case for an election. [Emphasis added]
202  The Privy Council referred to Island Records and reiterated the same principle in Tang Man Sit v. Capacious Investments Limited, [1996] AC 514, a case also referred to by Newbury J.A. Lord Nicholls stated:
In the ordinary course, by the time the trial is concluded a plaintiff will know which remedy is more advantageous to him. By then, if not before, he will know enough of the facts to assess where his best interests lie. There will be nothing unfair in requiring him to elect at that stage. Occasionally this may not be so. This is more likely to happen when the judgment is a default judgment or a summary judgment than at the conclusion of a trial. A plaintiff may not know how much money the defendant has made from the wrongful use of his property. It may be unreasonable to require the plaintiff to make his choice without further information. To meet this difficulty, the court may make discovery and other orders designed to give the plaintiff the information he needs, and which in fairness he ought to have, before deciding upon his remedy. A recent instance where this was done is the decision of Lightman J. in Island Records Ltd. v. Tring International Plc. [1995] 3 All E.R. 444. The court will take care to ensure that such an order is not oppressive to a defendant.
In the ordinary course the decision made when judgment is entered is made once and for all. That is the normal rule. The order is a final order, and the interests of the parties and the public interest alike dictate that there should be finality. The principle, however, is not rigid and unbending. Like all procedural principles, the established principles regarding election between alternative remedies are not fixed and unyielding rules. These principles are the means to an end, not the end in themselves. They are no more than practical applications of a general and overriding principle governing the conduct of legal proceedings, namely, that proceedings should be conducted in a manner which strikes a fair and reasonable balance between the interests of the parties, having proper regard also to the wider public interest in the conduct of court proceedings. Thus in Johnson v. Agnew [1980] A.C. 367 the House of Lords held that when specific performance fails to be realised, an order for specific performance may subsequently be discharged and an inquiry as to damages ordered. Lord Wilberforce observed, at p. 398: "Election, though the subject of much learning and refinement, is in the end a doctrine based on simple considerations of common sense and equity."
203  As will be seen from the above, neither of the English cases contemplate the plaintiff being entitled to receive a judgment of the court as to the quantification of the alternate remedies, whether the matter is dealt with in a single trial or a bifurcated process. That is not the information necessary to make an informed decision. The underlined passage from Island Records indicates quite the opposite.
B. "before final judgment is issued"
204  I turn next to the phrase "before final judgment is issued". The plaintiffs argue that this does not mean the issuing of reasons for judgment or the pronouncement of a judgment; rather, it means until the actual entry on the rolls of the court of the order signed by the court.
205  I do not agree with this submission. First, it is circular in nature: no election need be made until the entry of a final order, but an order is not final until a ruling has been made on the quantification of alternative remedies and the plaintiff has elected (or has declined to do so).
206  Second, what is generally considered critical is when judgments are pronounced, not when the formal order is entered. This is illustrated by Sienema v. British Columbia Insurance Co., , which concerned the regulation that barred the issuing of orders for special costs after July 1, 2002. The regulation, quoted in the judgment at para. 3, was worded:
No order for increased costs may be made after July 1, 2002.
207  Gill J. signed her reasons awarding special costs to the defendants on June 28, 2002, but they were not delivered by the registry to the parties until July 2. The plaintiff appealed on the basis that the order had not been pronounced until July 2. The Court of Appeal disagreed, and said, at para. 22:
... a judgment is pronounced when it is finally settled by the trial judge. The pronouncement of judgment is a judicial act. It is complete when the judge has signed the reasons for judgment and delivered them to the registry in their final form with instructions, express or implied, to communicate them to the parties. At that point, the judicial function is complete.
While the appellants did not argue that an order is not made until it is entered, it is inconceivable that that point would have escaped the Court of Appeal.
208  Sienema also reviews other cases in which the critical date was the date of pronouncement of the order.
209  This conclusion is consistent with Rule 13-1(8) of the Supreme Court Civil Rules, which states:
An order
(a) must be dated as of the date on which it was
pronounced or, if made by a registrar, as of the
date on which it is signed by the registrar, and
unless the court otherwise orders, takes effect on the day of its date.
210  A case relied on by plaintiffs illustrates the point that a judge is not functus until the order is entered and that an application may be made to vary an order that has been pronounced. But that is a different matter. As Southin J.A. stated in JJM Construction Ltd. v. Sandspit Harbour Society,  at para. 3:
It is perhaps useful to remind counsel that appeals are from judgment, not reasons for judgment. A judgment may be pronounced either orally or in writing. It takes its final shape in the instrument drawn up, sealed, and entered on the rolls of the court. The reason this Court does not hear appeals until an instrument is drawn up sealed and entered on the rolls of the court is that the judge in the court below has the right until that occurs to change the judgment which he has pronounced.
The fact that the judgment may be changed does not mean that a judgment has not been made.
211  There is a further point. Accountings may be done at trial, but they may also be done by reference. If a plaintiff was able to demand the quantifications of the alternative remedies before electing there would be the protracted process of the court assessing damages and the registrar hearing and determining the accounting.
212  The plaintiffs relied on two Ontario decisions. The first is Islip v. SSI Equipment Inc.,  (S.C.J.). That case is directly on point and does support the plaintiffs' position. Although the court referred to and relied on Moore, it did not consider the other authorities I have cited above. It pre-dated Tracy, which, in turn, cited Island Records with approval. Nor, of course, was Rule 13-1(8) relevant to the case. I therefore do not think it should be followed in this province.
213  The second Ontario decision is Potter Station Power Co. v. Inco Ltd.,  (S.C.J. Gen. Div.). The court concluded that the plaintiff had succeeded in establishing a claim for breach of contract and a claim in quantum meruit and assessed the quantum for both, providing the plaintiff the ability to choose between the two. Unlike the case at bar, in which the plaintiffs seek to avoid choosing between alternative remedies arising out of the same cause of action, the plaintiff successfully established the defendants' liability on two different causes of action. Further, the issue of when the election was to be made was not contested. Because of this and for the same reasons with respect to Islip, I do not think it is authoritative for the case at bar.
C. Conclusion
214  In my view the general principal is that a plaintiff is required to make its election when it has adequate information to allow it to make an informed choice. That does not entail a judgment of the court quantifying the alternative remedies.
215  The full evidence with respect to remedies has been adduced at trial. The plaintiffs therefore had sufficient information to enable them to make an informed election at that time.
216  Having gone through the arguments on remedies before requiring the election, I can add this comment. The failure to elect not only made the argument more lengthy - as would naturally be the case - but resulted in a lack of focus. At several instances it was unclear whether submissions and evidence were directed to disgorgement or to the loss-based remedy of equitable compensation. Even when I called counsel back for one day of supplementary argument on the quantification of compensation, there was a debate between counsel on that.
217  It might be that a judgment on liability is necessary in order to inform an election. If that is the case a plaintiff should apply for separate trials of liability and remedy, as appears to be the normal practice in England. That way the court can manage the process as opposed to the plaintiff simply arriving at trial without that issue having been canvassed in advance.
218  As I have said, the plaintiffs have elected to claim equitable compensation based on their loss.
 V.  APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES OF EQUITABLE COMPENSATION 
A. General principles
219  An award of equitable compensation is frequently referred to as "damages" or "equitable damages" but by whatever term, the principles to be applied are often (I discuss this qualifier below) different than those for common law damages. As stated by Ian E. Davidson, in "The Equitable Remedy of Compensation" (1982), 3 Melbourne Univ. Law Rev. 349:
Although compensation in Equity will often produce the same result as damages the common law and equitable remedies utilise different rules to achieve the similar goal of compensating a plaintiff for loss suffered. This can lead to significant differences in the ultimate awards. For example, common law damages in negligence and contract are subject to requirements of foreseeability and remoteness which are not relevant to Equity when it restores property or money lost by breach of an equitable obligation.
This article was cited with favourable comment by La Forest J. in Canson Enterprises v. Boughton & Co., ; .
220  Equitable compensation seeks to put the plaintiff in the position it would have been in had the breach not occurred. It is restitutionary in nature.
221  The parties differed with respect to the approach to be taken to compensation. However, much of the debate between the parties was relevant to the remedy of disgorgement and reverse onuses. Now that the plaintiffs have elected the remedy of compensation, the differences with respect to the former have fallen away and I do not need to rely on reverse onuses to reach the conclusions I come to regarding the quantification of compensation.
222  Nevertheless, the defendants' argument serves as a useful launching point for an examination of the applicable principles. They argue:
While some earlier cases, such as Guerin v Canada, ,approach remedial considerations arising out of a breach of fiduciary duty from the perspective of trust law, more recent authority has taken a different approach.
223  As will be seen, I do not agree with this. Rather, in my view the Supreme Court has drawn the distinction between different types of breaches of fiduciary duty.
224  I will begin by looking at the Supreme Court of Canada's decisions in Canson and Hodgkinson v. Simms, .
225  In Canson [cited to Carswell] the defendant acted as the solicitor for the plaintiffs in the purchase of land. The defendant failed to advise the plaintiffs that a secret profit was being made by a third party. The plaintiffs built a warehouse on the land. The warehouse was damaged when the piles supporting it began to sink. The plaintiffs had previously sued the soil engineers and the pile-driving company but could not recover all of their loss. They then sued the solicitor for the shortfall, claiming breach of fiduciary duty. The central issue before the court was whether, as the Court of Appeal held, the loss claimed was too remote because it was caused by third parties.
226  La Forest J. held that it was too remote. In doing so he drew the distinction between different types of fiduciary duty, which may result in different approaches to compensation. He said:
41 The appellants urged us to accept the manner of calculating compensation adopted by the courts in trust cases or situations akin to a trust, and they relied in particular on the Guerin case, supra. I think the courts below were perfectly right to reject that proposition. There is a sharp divide between a situation where a person has control of property which in the view of the courts belongs to another, and one where a person is under a fiduciary duty to perform an obligation where equity's concern is simply that the duty be performed honestly and in accordance with the undertaking the fiduciary has taken on: see L.S. Sealy, "Some Principles of Fiduciary Obligation," [1963] Cambridge L.J. 119; L.S. Sealy, "Fiduciary Relationships," [1962] Cambridge L. J. 69. In the case of a trust relationship, the trustee's obligation is to hold the res or object of the trust for his cestui que trust, and on breach the concern of equity is that it be restored to the cestui que trust or if that cannot be done to afford compensation for what the object would be worth. In the case of a mere breach of duty, the concern of equity is to ascertain the loss resulting from the breach of the particular duty. Where the wrongdoer has received some benefit, that benefit can be disgorged, but the measure of compensation where no such benefit has been obtained by the wrongdoer raises different issues. I turn then specifically to that situation.
and:
56 But, as these cases underline, equity cannot be rigidly applied. Its doctrines must be attuned to different circumstances. Quite obviously not all fiduciary obligations are the same. It would be wholly inappropriate to interpret equitable doctrines so technically as to displace common law rules that achieve substantial justice in areas of common concern, thereby leading to harsh and inequitable results. I wholeheartedly reject the notion advanced by the appellants that the Court of Appeal "fell into error because of a misplaced concern with concepts of common sense and reasonableness." I would have thought these concerns were central to both common law and equity. [Emphasis added]
227  I think it fair to characterize the conclusion of La Forest J. as this: because the cause of action completely overlapped with ones available at common law, common law damage principles should be applied. It is clear from the underlined passage in the previous paragraph that La Forest J. did not mean that all cases of fiduciary duty should be treated the same. As will be seen, he returned to that theme in Hodgkinson.
228  McLachlin J. (as she then was), writing for herself, Lamer C.J.C and L'Hereux Dubé J., reached the same result (disallowing the claimed compensation), but for different reasons. She disagreed with the application of common law principles but concluded that the defendant was not liable for the loss because there was no link between the breach of fiduciary duty and the loss. This was so because when the engineers and pile-drivers performed their work, the solicitor's work had ended and the plaintiffs had assumed control over the property (paras. 85-86). She set out the principles that apply to equitable compensation: the loss need not be foreseeable (para. 79) and the plaintiffs' loss is to be assessed at the time of trial, with the full benefit of hindsight (paras. 81 and 84). Mitigation and causation apply, but differently than they do in the context of common law damages; I discuss this separately later.
229  In Hodgkinson v. Simms, the defendant was the plaintiff's accountant. He advised the plaintiff to make an investment in a real estate project in which he had an undisclosed financial interest. The plaintiff paid fair market value for the investment but because of a real estate market collapse, the investment became virtually worthless. The defendant said that its non-disclosure was not the proximate cause of the loss; rather, the loss was caused by market conditions.
230  La Forest J., writing for the majority, rejected this argument, on the basis that (as found by the trial judge), were it not for the defendant's breach, the plaintiff would not have invested in the project, and would not have been exposed to any market risk. The defendant was therefore liable to make good the loss. La Forest J. took pains to properly characterize Canson:
80 Contrary to the respondent's submission, this result is not affected by the ratio of this Court's decision in Canson Enterprises, supra. Canson held that a court exercising equitable jurisdiction is not precluded from considering the principles of remoteness, causation, and intervening act where necessary to reach a just and fair result. Canson does not, however, signal a retreat from the principle of full restitution; rather it recognizes the fact that a breach of a fiduciary duty can take a variety of forms, and as such a variety of remedial considerations may be appropriate; see also McInerney v. MacDonald, , supra, at p. 149. Writing extra-judicially, Huband J.A. of the Manitoba Court of Appeal recently remarked upon this idea, in "Remedies and Restitution for Breach of Fiduciary Duties" in The 1993 Isaac Pitblado Lectures, supra, pp. 21-32, at p. 31:
A breach of a fiduciary duty can take many forms. It might be tantamount to deceit and theft, while on the other hand it may be no more than an innocent and honest bit of bad advice, or a failure to give a timely warning.
Canson is an example of the latter type of fiduciary breach, mentioned by Huband J.A. There, the defendant solicitor failed to warn the plaintiff, his client, that the vendors and other third parties were pocketing a secret profit from a "flip" of the subject real estate such that the property was overpriced. See also Jacks, supra. In this situation, the principle of full restitution should not entitle a plaintiff to greater compensation than he or she would otherwise be entitled to at common law, wherein the limiting principles of intervening act would come into play.
81 Put another way, equity is not so rigid as to be susceptible to being used as a vehicle for punishing defendants with harsh damage awards out of all proportion to their actual behaviour. On the contrary, where the common law has developed a measured and just principle in response to a particular kind of wrong, equity is flexible enough to borrow from the common law. [Emphasis added]
231  No case was cited to me where a court awarded equitable compensation for breach of the corporate opportunity doctrine. Most cases, including Canadian Aero, dealt with the remedy of disgorgement of the gain. The only corporate opportunity case I located where a plaintiff elected and was awarded equitable compensation was Indutech Canada Ltd. v Gibbs Pipe Distributors Ltd., . Romaine J. cited and applied the principles enunciated by McLachlin J. in Canson.
232  Breach of the corporate opportunity doctrine is not analogous to a case of a fiduciary giving bad advice, nor does the cause of action overlap with a common law claim. Rather, it is closer to a true breach of trust of claim where a trustee purloins trust property in that the right to pursue the opportunity is something that belongs to the company. On any analysis, it appears to me that the principles to be brought to bear in the case at bar are largely those enunciated by McLachlin J. in Canson, and affirmed by the whole Court in Hodgkinson.
B. Causation
233  In Canson, McLachlin J. had this to say about causation in the context of equitable compensation:
... Foreseeability is not a concern in assessing compensation, but it is essential that the losses made good are only those which, on a common sense view of causation, were caused by the breach.
234  What of the argument - one made in the case at bar - that a plaintiff would have taken the same steps that caused its loss even if the defendant had not breached its fiduciary duty? In Hodgkinson, the defendant argued that the plaintiff would have made the same investment even had the defendant disclosed his financial interest. La Forest J. rejected that argument:
76 What is more, the submission runs up against the long-standing equitable principle that where the plaintiff has made out a case of non-disclosure and the loss occasioned thereby is established, the onus is on the defendant to prove that the innocent victim would have suffered the same loss regardless of the breach; see London Loan & Savings Co. v. Brickenden,  (P.C.), at pp. 550-51; see also Huff v. Price, , supra, at pp. 319-20; Commerce Capital Trust Co. v. Berk  (Ont. C.A.), at pp. 763-64. This Court recently affirmed the same principle with respect to damages at common law in the context of negligent misrepresentation; see Rainbow Industrial Caterers Ltd. v. Canadian National Railway Co., , at pp. 14-17. I will return to the common law cases in greater detail later; it suffices now to say that courts exercising both common law and equitable jurisdiction have approached this issue in the same manner. In Rainbow, Sopinka J., on behalf of a 6-1 majority of this Court, had this to say, at pp. 15-16:
The plaintiff is the innocent victim of a misrepresentation which has induced a change of position. It is just that the plaintiff should be entitled to say "but for the tortious conduct of the defendant, I would not have changed my position". A tortfeasor who says, "Yes, but you would have assumed a position other than the status quo ante", and thereby asks a court to find a transaction whose terms are hypothetical and speculative, should bear the burden of displacing the plaintiff's assertion of the status quo ante.
Further, mere "speculation" on the part of the defendant will not suffice; see ibid., at p. 15; Commerce Capital, supra, at p. 764. In the present case the respondent has adduced no concrete evidence to "displac[e] the plaintiff's assertion of the status quo ante", and this submission must, therefore, be dismissed. [Emphasis added]
235  The case at bar is the inverse of Hodgkinson in that it involves the allegation that First Silver would have not taken steps to acquire Bolanos, rather than an assertion that the plaintiffs would have done something even if a misrepresentation had not been made. Nevertheless, I do not see that as a meaningful distinction on the facts of this case, where Mr. Davila has taken the opportunity for himself, thereby precluding the plaintiffs from acquiring it.
C. Mitigation
236  Lastly, I turn to the issue of whether, in an equitable compensation case, a defendant has the obligation to mitigate its loss.
237  In Canson, La Forest J. (at paras. 81-2) cited with agreement the following paragraph from the New Zealand Court of Appeal's decision in Day v. Mead, [1987] 2 N.Z.L.R. 443:
Whether or not there are reported cases in which compensation for breach of a fiduciary obligation has been assessed on the footing that the plaintiff should accept some share of the responsibility, there appears to be no solid reason for denying jurisdiction to follow that obviously just course, especially now that law and equity have mingled or are interacting. It is an opportunity for equity to show that it has not petrified and to live up to the spirit of its maxims. Moreover, assuming that the Contributory Negligence Act does not itself apply, it is nevertheless helpful as an analogy, on the principle to which we in New Zealand are increasingly giving weight that the evolution of Judge-made law may be influenced by the ideas of the legislature as reflected in contemporary statutes and by other current trends: compare Dominion Rent A Car Ltd v Budget Rent a Car Systems (1970) Ltd [1978] 2 NZLR 395, citing Erven Warnink v J Townend & Sons (Hull) Ltd [1979] AC 731, 743 per Lord Diplock.
238  McLachlin J. was more specific in defining the mitigation obligation of a defendant in an equitable compensation claim:
23 The thrust of these dicta is that while the plaintiff will not be required to act in as reasonable and prudent a manner as might be required in negligence or contract, losses stemming from the plaintiff's unreasonable actions will be barred. This is also sound policy in the law of fiduciary duty. In negligence and contract the law limits the actions of the parties who are expected to pursue their own best interest. Each is expected to continue to look after their own interests after a breach or tort, and so a duty of mitigation is imposed. In contrast, the hallmark of fiduciary relationship is that the fiduciary, at least within a certain scope, is expected to pursue the best interest of the client. It may not be fair to allow the fiduciary to complain when the client fails forthwith to shoulder the fiduciary's burden. This approach to mitigation accords with the basic rule of equitable compensation that the injured party will be reimbursed for all losses flowing directly from the breach. When the plaintiff, after due notice and opportunity, fails to take the most obvious steps to alleviate his or her losses, then we may rightly say that the plaintiff has been "the author of his own misfortune." At this point the plaintiff's failure to mitigate may become so egregious that it is no longer sensible to say that the losses which followed were caused by the fiduciary's breach. But until that point mitigation will not be required. This said, it must also be emphasized that behaviour by the defendant which is a not unreasonable attempt to make the best of a difficult situation, as in Doyle v. Olby (Ironmongers) Ltd. or Esso Petroleum Co. v. Mardon [1976] Q.B. 801 (C.A.), will not be penalized.
[Emphasis added]
239  The defendants point to Hunt v. T.D. Securities  No. (C.A.), and argue that the duty to mitigate in breach of fiduciary duty claims is the same standard as for other claims, such as negligence.
240  In Hunt the plaintiff claimed against a bank for improperly having sold securities owned by the plaintiff. The Court of Appeal disposed of the case on a contractual basis and held that the plaintiff failed to mitigate its loss because it did not replace the shares when it became aware of the improper sale and was in a position to do so. Although not necessary for its decision, the court went on to say that the same result would have been reached had the case been one of breach of fiduciary duty.
241  The court referred to Canson and Hodgkinson and then said:
113 In this passage, LaForest J. reiterates that a wrongdoer is liable for the harm that results from the wrongful conduct. However, the extent of that liability is subject to the circumstances of the innocent party and the extent to which the injured party is reasonably expected to react to and mitigate that harm.
114 The majority judgment in Hodgkinson, together with the judgment in Canson, indicate that where a breach of fiduciary duty does not raise policy concerns that militate against imposing a duty to mitigate, and the rationale behind the common law duty to mitigate is applicable, then equity will impose the same obligation to mitigate in order to avoid unnecessary loss.
242  That must be read in conjunction with the passages from Canson cited by the Court of Appeal (quoted above) and the case that was before the Court of Appeal. Just as the Supreme Court said in Canson that where there is a direct overlap between cases of breach of fiduciary duty and common law claims, common law principles are ordinarily to be applied, so with the duty mitigate. In Hunt, there was an overlap between breach of contract and the breach of fiduciary duty. However, the case at bar is one of the taking of a corporate opportunity in breach of a fiduciary's duty, which does not overlap with a common law obligation or claim. Therefore the standard to be applied must be that articulated by McLachlin J., namely the defendants must demonstrate that the plaintiffs did not take "the most obvious steps" to alleviate their loss.
D. Negative contingencies
243  In valuing an opportunity, the court must take into account appropriate negative contingencies. This is so even though the case is one of breach of fiduciary duty.
244  In Guerin v. Canada, , the court was split on whether the government was a trustee for the plaintiff Indian band or a fiduciary. However, all were in agreement that damages should be assessed by analogy to the principles of trust law. They accepted the trial judge's assessment of the amount of the award, which included a deduction for a contingency: see para. 54 of the judgment.
245  The application of negative contingencies was discussed by Satanove J. in Rec Holdings Co. v. Peat Marwick Thorne,  (S.C.), a case of breach of fiduciary duty.
117 I am of the view that this case is really about a commercial opportunity which was lost to the plaintiffs due to the breach of fiduciary duty by the defendants. The law is now clear that:
Where the plaintiff proves that, but for the defendants' conduct, the plaintiff had a reasonable probability of realizing an advantage of real monetary value, the Court must attempt to estimate the value of the lost chance and award damages on a proportionate basis, by discounting the value of the chance by the improbability of its occurrence.
Pan-Asia Development Corp. v. Smith  (B.C.S.C.)
and:
121 How then does the court assess damages for lost opportunity? Lysyk, J. in Cuttell v. Bentz  (B.C.S.C.) said that "the amount to be assessed for the loss of opportunity represents an exercise of judgment based on the particular facts of the case". Basically, it is an exercise in applying negative contingencies. The court tries to determine what most likely would have happened and then discounts for what possibly, but not fancifully, could have happened to prevent the opportunity from reaching fruition.
246  In Olive Hospitality Inc. v. Woo, , a case of breach of fiduciary duty, the Court of Appeal described the principle, at para. 14:
To prove damages caused by a loss of chance or a loss of an opportunity to obtain a financial advantage in the future - however difficult that may be - a plaintiff (here the company) must adduce evidence to establish some reasonable probability that it would have realized an advantage of some real substantial monetary value: Eastwalsh Homes Ltd. v. Anatal Development Ltd. ,  at 689-90 (Ont. C.A.). See also the discussion in this Court's decision in Papageorgiou v. Seyl  at 326 and the authority cited. It is then for the court to make the best assessment it can of the value of the loss sustained having regard for the contingencies that bear on whether, had the opportunity not been lost, a financial advantage would actually have been realized.
247  It will be seen from the above that the purpose of applying a contingency is to account for the probability of the opportunity being realised or how much would be made from it.
 E.  Market valuation or discounted cash flow analysis? 
248  There is a major difference in the experts' quantification analyses with respect to whether damages should be based primarily on the market value of Bolanos (the defendants' position) or on the basis of a discounted cash flow analysis (the plaintiffs' position). It is easier to address this issue when I consider these analyses below.
 VI. MITIGATION AND CAUSATION 
249  Earlier in these reasons I addressed the issue of whether a plaintiff in a breach of corporate opportunity claim has a duty to mitigate and what that standard is. My conclusion is set out at para. 242. In this section I address the application of that standard to the facts.
250  The defendants' arguments relating to mitigation and causation largely overlap and are based on the same factors: the time when the plaintiffs became aware of the fact that Bolanos was allegedly First Silver's opportunity, and the lack of steps they took to acquire it before Mr. Davila bought it. I will therefore deal with them together.
251  There is, however, a separate argument on causation, one arising out of the November 24, 2008 letter where the defendants offered to sell Bolanos to the plaintiffs. I will deal with that first.
 A.  Did the plaintiffs fail to mitigate their loss when they did not accept the defendants' November 24, 2008 offer to sell Bolanos? 
252  As mentioned (above, para. 108), on November 24, 2008, the defendants' counsel - Mr. Church - wrote the plaintiffs' counsel - then Mr. Taylor - offering the plaintiffs the ability to buy Bolanos in full settlement of the litigation. The letter was made "with prejudice" and the defendants reserved the right to show it to the court at trial. The defendants say that the plaintiffs failed to mitigate their damages by failing to accept the offer.
253  The letter noted:
... my clients have spent <damage type = "other">$19,935,182.08</damage> US on purchasing and improving the Property. They are obliged to pay a further <damage type = "other">$7,336,769.29</damage> US to Grupo Mexico in connection with the purchase of the Property, on or before November 1, 2010.
254  The terms of the offer included:
The plaintiffs would immediately pay the sum of <damage type = "other">$27,271,961.37</damage> US into trust.
<damage type = "other">$19,935,182.08</damage> US would be paid to the defendants upon the closing of the sale to the plaintiffs. The balance in trust would be used to satisfy the balance of the obligation to Grupo, except insofar as Grupo agrees to forgo any of it
The sale of the Property would take place prior to December 31, 2008.
The plaintiffs would immediately pay Mr. Davila <damage type = "other">$405,599.04</damage> representing interest under the share purchase agreement.
The plaintiffs would consent to the immediate release to Mr. Davila of approximately <damage type = "other">$6.3 million</damage> in Church & Company's trust account (representing the proceeds of the sale of shares that were then subject to a Mareva injunction the plaintiffs had obtained against Mr. Davila).
The plaintiffs would execute a consent dismissal order dismissing the claims of the plaintiffs and the cross-claims of the defendants in the Supreme Court Action, and the defendants would abandon their appeal of the Mareva injunction order.
The offer was open for acceptance in writing until November 28, 2008, i.e. four days after the offer was made.
255  The offer was not rejected outright, nor was it accepted. Mr. Taylor's reply stated, in part:
In addition, we are surprised at both the form of, and deadline imposed in the offer contained in your letter. This form of offer is clearly inappropriate for a public company to entertain. It is apparent to us that the offer has been made solely for strategic purposes.
As you are aware, the main claims in the Supreme Court Action are for damages for breach of fiduciary duty. The Plaintiffs are not pursuing title to the Bolanos Mine in the action, unless it is included in a settlement agreement. Further, as you are also aware, First Majestic made good faith efforts in the fall of 2006 to negotiate a settlement with your clients. Those negotiations collapsed when your clients broke off negotiations.
Our clients are prepared to consider a reasonable and businesslike solution to this litigation. They are also prepared to consider all reasonable approaches to resolving the litigation including the prospect of acquiring the Bolanos Property. If your client is truly interested in a resolution (as opposed to tactics), the proper first step would be to agree on a negotiation framework which takes into account the fact that First Majestic is a public company.
We anticipate that the framework would include the following:
That your clients provide all data in their possession regarding Bolanos to First Majestic;
That your clients assist in arranging for Grupo Mexico to provide all data in its possession regarding Bolanos to First Majestic, for the purpose of valuing the Bolanos asset;
That your client provide full disclosure regarding the amounts allegedly spent on improving Bolanos, including, specifically, a breakdown between improvements made on the mine, the mill, and the tailings pond; and
That First Majestic be provided full access to the Bolanos Mine and the mill so that it can conduct proper and full due diligence regarding the property.
If your clients are truly interested in a negotiated settlement involving the sale of the Bolanos Mine, they should have no difficulty with the above conditions. Assuming your client is genuine about negotiating a settlement, First Majestic is prepared to seek Board approval to conduct due diligence and, if warranted, negotiate the acquisition of Bolanos. It is likely that those negotiations will require adjustments to be paid to the Plaintiffs as a result of the damages which the Plaintiffs have suffered to date.
256  I do not agree that the plaintiffs' refusal to accept the offer was a failure to take an obvious step to avoid the claimed loss (the equitable standard). In fact, even if the standard were the same as the common law standard - one of a defendant acting unreasonably - I would reach the same conclusion.
257  First, I note that only four days was allowed for acceptance of the offer. That is an exceedingly short time for the purchase of a mine. As Mr. Church conceded in argument, there was no specific reason for making the offer so short-fused.
258  Second, the offer contains no provision to permit any due diligence investigation. There is no provision allowing access to data about property and there is no ability for the plaintiffs to physically inspect the property.
259  I do not think any evidence is needed to allow the court to draw the conclusion that in a transaction of this nature due diligence is something that any reasonable purchaser would expect, but if evidence is required there is that of Mr. Davila himself. In his evidence, he acknowledged it was normal and would entail access to data about a mining property and the inspection of the property itself.
260  Furthermore, to the knowledge of Mr. Davila, that was the view of the board of First Silver. On January 23, 2006, the board had instructed Mr. Davila to pay Grupo the <damage type = "other">$100,00</damage> deposit for the Bolanos purchase and to engage Pincock Allen and Holt (PAH) to prepare a report on Bolanos (above, para. 30). He did neither.
261  The defendants argue that the plaintiffs already had enough information about Bolanos to make a decision in the absence of a due diligence investigation. That is something they must prove and in order to displace the ability to perform due diligence for a project of this complexity they would have to go quite some distance in doing so. They have not done that. What might be the most telling in this regard is the fact that the defendants did not produce the Grupo documents on the mine, which included core sample data, until a year after Mr. Church's letter. Both sets of experts relied extensively on these documents in order to prepare their damage analyses. It is hard to see how an informed analysis could have been done without these documents.
262  Mr. Davila's evidence was to the effect that he expected the plaintiffs to come back and discuss the matter further and that he was not intending to rely on the strict term of the letter. That puts the lie to the reasonableness of the position taken in the letter. Moreover, Mr. Taylor did respond to the letter and sought to engage in an ongoing process but his letter was never answered.
263  That is enough to dismiss the defendants' plea of failure to mitigate, but there is more. As I said earlier in these reasons, the plaintiffs were entitled to elect between a disgorgement remedy and loss-based remedy. Yet the settlement letter and the defendants' failure to mitigate argument do not provide that option; it purports to make an election for them. Moreover, it does so at a time before which the plaintiffs would be required to make their own election, namely only after they had sufficient information to enable them to do so. That information at minimum would include the Grupo documents to which I referred in para. 261.
264  In conclusion, the approach of the defendants in the letter was to treat the transaction more cavalierly than would be done for the purchase of a one-bedroom condominium. The plaintiffs cannot be faulted for not accepting the offer.
 B.  Did the breach of fiduciary duty cause the plaintiffs any loss or did the plaintiffs fail to mitigate their loss due to their inactivity? 
265  The defendants' position is captured in the following extract from their written submission:
Given what the principals of the Plaintiffs knew about (1) the pre-existing negotiations of First Silver / el Pilon for the Bolanos Property and (2) Hector's later negotiations to acquire the Bolanos Property for Arroyo, and given the Plaintiffs' informed decision on multiple occasions to do nothing to have Hector's negotiations terminated, or to acquire the Bolanos Property for themselves, the true characterization of what occurred in this case is not that the Defendants caused the Plaintiffs to lose an opportunity to acquire Bolanos, but rather that the Plaintiffs made the business decision not to pursue that opportunity. When the Plaintiffs chose on a number of occasions to simply "sit back and watch" the Defendants pursue the Bolanos opportunity, the Plaintiffs were not losing the opportunity as a result of the Defendants' actions; rather, the Plaintiffs were abandoning the opportunity.
Thus, one can characterize the Plaintiffs' actions and omissions as the true cause of their "loss" of opportunity (thereby leading to a failure to establish causation). Alternatively, if the Court finds that the Defendants initially caused the Plaintiffs to lose that opportunity, the same actions and omissions can be characterised as a complete failure by the Plaintiffs to mitigate their initial loss of opportunity to negotiate for the Bolanos Property.
In considering the question of causation and mitigation, one must bear in mind that the Plaintiffs had the necessary knowledge, and the available means, to terminate Hector's negotiations with Grupo Mexico for the Bolanos Property and to enter into their own negotiations for the Bolanos Property, by no later than April or May 2006. ...
266  The state of play with respect to Bolanos and the parties at the time Mr. Davila acquired it in August 2007 is of central importance to this causation-mitigation argument. This was:
Mr. Davila had been told by Ramon and Mr. Neumeyer that the opportunity belonged to First Silver.
Both parties told Grupo that they felt they had the right to acquire Bolanos.
Both the plaintiffs and Mr. Davila had been told by Grupo that it would not sell the mine to either of them until they resolved their differences. (I do not refer to this evidence for the truth of its contents; rather, I use it to show the state of mind of the parties.)
The parties had met in September 2006 and tried to reach a solution but were unable to do so.
Ramon's last contact with Grupo was on June 13, 2007, and he had met with Grupo's president in March 2007.
Mr. Davila recommenced his negotiations with Grupo in April 2007.
At no time did either plaintiff tell Mr. Davila that it had given up on Bolanos.
At no time did Mr. Davila tell the plaintiffs that he was trying to persuade Grupo to do a deal with him directly.
267  Further, the conclusion I reach from all of the evidence is that Mr. Davila deliberately took advantage of the sale of his shares to obfuscate the dealings for Bolanos. He did this so that if First Majestic did not buy his tailings, he could then acquire Bolanos for himself under cover of the fog that inevitably occurs in a major corporate transition.
268  These facts undercut the defendants' argument. First, the defendants say, as quoted above, that the plaintiffs had the ability to terminate Mr. Davila's negotiations with Grupo. But that is exactly what Mr. Neumeyer and Ramon legitimately thought they had done and that is what Mr. Davila said he had been told by Mr. Martinez, so he was left with the same impression.
269  Second, the plaintiffs did not "do nothing". They asserted their position both with Grupo and with Mr. Davila and they did so before Mr. Davila bought Bolanos.
270  The real complaint of Mr. Davila is not that the plaintiffs did nothing; rather, it is that what they did do was not done quickly or vociferously enough. As I indicated (above, para. 152), as a fiduciary and on the facts of this case, I do not think that argument lies in Mr. Davila's mouth. It is true that Mr. Neumeyer balanced First Majestic's acquisition of Quebradillas against raising Bolanos with Grupo earlier. However, it was Mr. Davila's wrongful acts that created the dilemma. Having done that, and knowing that the plaintiffs were asserting their rights to Bolanos, it cannot be open to him to second-guess the timing of the plaintiffs' actions or their business judgments.
271  Mr. Davila argues that when Mr. Neumeyer put Quebradillas ahead of Bolanos, he may have been acting in First Majestic's best interests but not First Silver's. Once again, for the same reasons, I do not think that it is open for him to argue.
 C.  Would the plaintiffs have purchased Bolanos in any event of the breach? 
 1.  First Majestic's or First Silver's financial capability to purchase Bolanos 
272  The defendants argue that neither First Silver on its own or together with First Majestic had the financial wherewithal to purchase Bolanos. They say that First Silver and El Pilon together had approximately $3 million in funds at the time First Majestic acquired them. With respect to First Majestic, the defendants point to the fact that it posted losses and incurred deficits throughout 2005 and 2008.
273  The discussions between Mr. Davila and Grupo with respect to Bolanos were underway on the cusp of Mr. Davila's sale to First Majestic. The period to consider in relation to this issue is therefore after that transaction took place, and from that time First Majestic's status is equally or more important than First Silver's.
274  In my view, the onus of proving that the plaintiffs would not have been able to finance the acquisition rests with the defendants.
275  First Majestic's or First Silver's financing (directly or through First Majestic) would have taken place through a share offering. That was Mr. Neumeyer's evidence, and I do not think that was disputed by the defendants. Furthermore, KPMG in their report on discount rates, which I discuss below in relation to damages, said that mining ventures are typically financed primarily with equity.
276  Apart from the financial statements of First Silver and First Majestic the defendants presented no evidence on this point. As the plaintiffs point out, a lack of cash reserves does not prove an inability to raise funding; that is the reason a company seeks public financing. I do not see how I could conclude that a loss would preclude the plaintiffs from doing a share financing in the absence of expert evidence to that effect.
277  Moreover, the minimal evidence there is points to the opposite conclusion. First Majestic's 2006 financial statement disclosed a loss of <damage type = "other">$2.5 million</damage> as at March 31, 2006 and stated that the company's cash reserves were insufficient to maintain First Majestic's interests in all its mineral properties. However, the statement went on to say that the company raised <damage type = "other">$28 million</damage> through a private warrant placement on April 20. Subsequent to that First Majestic raised <damage type = "other">$16 million</damage> in November 2006, $34 million in May 2007, <damage type = "other">$45 million</damage> in March 2008 and <damage type = "other">$21 million</damage> in March 2009.
278  I therefore do not accept this argument. That said, the risk of not being able to obtain financing is something that may be considered as a possible contingency to reduce the damage award. I will deal with that later.
 2.  Would the plaintiffs have gone ahead with the purchase of Bolanos? 
279  Apart from the financing issue, the defendants next argue that the plaintiffs would not have purchased Bolanos because they did not really want it. Once again, they rely on the chronology of events showing, they say, the lack of steps the plaintiffs took to acquire the mine.
280  There is nothing at the board level of either First Majestic or First Silver that shows there was lack of interest in Bolanos. I have gone over this evidence earlier.
281  The expert reports are a proxy for what would have been disclosed in a due diligence analysis. Mr. Neumeyer confirmed, both in chief and under cross, that with the results in the reports that were prepared for this litigation (discussed below in relation to quantum) that: Bolanos would have fit very well into First Majestic's portfolio of properties; Mr. Neumeyer would have wanted to acquire Bolanos; First Majestic would have agreed to the terms offered to First Silver; and First Majestic would have been ready, willing and able to pay <damage type = "other">$20 million</damage> for the shares of MMM. Ramon's evidence was similar.
282  There are limitations to this type of "would have done" evidence. In Hongkong Bank of Canada v. Touche Ross & Co.  (C.A.), Southin J.A. commented:
40 What the learned judge said was this [p. 4]:
The evidence of [the bank officer in charge] is he would not have made the loan with knowledge of the tax liability. This statement is made with hindsight and could be coloured by self-interest. Nevertheless, I accept this evidence as fact.
41 At one point in the argument, I was disturbed by this conclusion. It is always easy for a witness to say what he would have done and for a judge to say he accepts that assertion. But such evidence is, in truth, not evidence of a fact but evidence of opinion. It should be tested in the crucible of reason.
42 Having looked at the reason of the matter, I am of the opinion that the bank officer's evidence was reasonable for the undisclosed liability was large and the creditor more powerful than ordinary creditors. The evidence being reasonable, the judge's acceptance of it, opinion though it was, could not be said to be unreasonable.
283  However, in the case at bar there is surrounding evidence to support Mr. Neumeyer's and Ramon's assertions. This includes the proximity of Bolanos to the San Martin mine allowing for possible synergies, and the fact that the Bolanos silver resources exceeded those of San Martin. Further, even Mr. Davila recognised that it would have been advantageous for First Silver to acquire Bolanos.
284  It is possible that First Majestic might not have pursued or finalised a purchase from Grupo, but that is a matter to deal with when considering whether a damage award should be reduced for those contingencies. At this stage - one dealing with causation in the context of a corporate opportunity claim - the question is a different one. It is whether the defendants have shown that First Majestic or First Silver would not have pursued the opportunity. They have not done so. And even if the onus rested on the plaintiffs to show that they would have pursued the opportunity, I think they have done so.
 D.  When would the plaintiffs have acquired and developed Bolanos? 
285  A relevant factor in determining the quantum of equitable compensation is the assumed date at which First Silver would have acquired Bolanos, assuming no breach of fiduciary duty by Mr. Davila.
286  On March 22, 2006, Mr. Davila advised the board of First Silver that the contract for Bolanos would be drawn up and signed "in the near future". That was on the cusp of Mr. Davila agreeing to sell his shares to First Majestic.
287  It is unlikely that the Board of First Silver would have made a decision to acquire the mine when the purchase of Mr. Davila's shares was imminent or underway. Once First Majestic took control of First Silver, no doubt some time would have been required to allow the dust to settle, to consider the opportunity and to conduct due diligence. The share purchase closed on May 30, 2006. I would therefore determine the hypothetical acquisition date to be around the end of 2006 or beginning of 2007.
288  The evidence indicates that the Alacran and San Francisco mines were brought to a near-production stage by the defendants within about one year after work started on their refurbishment. Further, the evidence of one of the plaintiffs' experts, Mr. Haptonstall, was that the time to refurbish those two mines would be one year. That would put the start of production at around the beginning of 2008.
289  In cross-examination Mr. Haptonstall said that the other mines would be refurbished once the work was done on El Alacran and San Francisco.
290  In cross-examination, one of the defendants' experts, Mr. Guarnera, stated that no rational mining company would have developed a mine at this time because of depressed silver prices. However, as the plaintiffs pointed out, that is an opinion that was not included in any of the several reports prepared by him or his firm. Accordingly, I do not agree that I can take that into account. Further, it states a conclusion without any analysis; for example, it does not address whether a mine owner might assess that silver prices are likely to rise in the future and develop a mine on that basis.
291  Finally, Mr. Guarnera prepared a valuation of Bolanos as at November 28, 2008. As part of that valuation he attributed a net present value of the cash flows to be derived from the mine based on silver prices at that time. The figure he arrived at was <damage type = "other">$36 million</damage>. And he stated that the mine "had significant upside potential, beyond the Mineable Reserves" taken into account by him.
292  I therefore conclude that: First Silver would have acquired Bolanos at the beginning of 2007; the Alacran and San Francisco mines would have started producing ore at the beginning of 2008; and the remaining mines would have come on stream approximately a year later, namely the beginning of 2009.
 VII.  QUANTIFICATION OF THE EQUITABLE COMPENSATION 
293  The first step in determining the compensation to which First Silver is entitled is to value the opportunity it lost. Then it will be necessary to apply any applicable contingencies to that. As concluded in the previous section, the value is to be assessed with the benefit of "hindsight" information available at trial. After that it will be necessary to determine whether any contingencies reduce the amount of the award.
294  All of the experts expressed their opinions in U.S. dollars, largely because that is the price at which silver trades. All figures in this judgment are also in U.S. dollars.
295  The plaintiffs' opinions were prepared by several experts at Pincock, Allen and Holt (PAH) and one at KPMG. (PAH happened to be the firm that First Silver directed Mr. Davila to engage at its January 23, 2006 board meeting for the purpose of completing a 43-101 report: above, para. 30.) I will explain PAH's and KPMG's respective roles momentarily. The defendants' report was prepared by various experts at Behre Dolbear. All of the experts are experienced and distinguished in their fields and there is no question as to their qualifications. That said, each side challenged the credibility and reliability of the others' expert evidence and ultimate conclusions.
296  The approach of each set of experts was quite different, although, as will be seen, they did overlap in one area.
297  The plaintiffs' analysis is based on the estimated income stream or cash flows from Bolanos starting at various assumed times and ending at an estimated exhaustion of the economic resource. In order to arrive at this, the PAH report provided:
An opinion as to the resources at the Bolanos Mine, classified as "Measured Mineral Resources", "Inferred Mineral Resources" and "Indicated Mineral Resources". These are the classifications utilized in National Instrument 43-101, which sets out how public companies may disclose scientific and technical information about mineral properties.
An opinion as to the time and expenditure required to rehabilitate the existing mining infrastructure and restore mining operations at the Bolanos Mine.
An opinion as to the time and expenditure required to rehabilitate the ore processing plant and other infrastructure and restore milling operations.
Opinions as to discounted net present values ("NPV"), taking into account future cash flows, expenditures over the anticipated life of the Bolanos Mine (including an acquisition cost of US <damage type = "other">$16 million</damage>), discounted to the equivalent present value.
298  PAH calculated the net present value assuming different times at which the mine would have started production. In view of my conclusion that the mine would likely have started production in 2008, I will focus on its analysis for that time, which yielded a net present value of $US 116 million.
299  In contrast, Behre Dolbear for the defendants arrived at a fair market value defined as "the price a willing buyer would pay a willing seller for an asset with each party having the same base of knowledge regarding the asset, and neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell." In order to determine that, Behre Dolbear determined and weighted the value of the mine according to four different methodologies:
An Income Approach valuation based upon the 10-year mine plan, as developed by Behre Dolbear for the November 28, 2008 valuation and operations based upon projections from Minerales Y Minas Mexicanas S.A. de C.V. (MMM) for the April 17, 2012 valuation.
A value derived from Market Related Transactions involving other silver-dominant properties, based upon prices paid for reserves and resources.
A value based upon Market Multiples per ounce of reserves and resources that are ascribed to other silver-producing companies.
A value based on an actual transaction for the property.
The "actual transaction" in the last bullet point was the price at which Mr. Davila purchased Bolanos.
300  Behre Dolbear's opinion was meant to be a valuation of Bolanos. PAH and KPMG, for the defendants, meant to provide an e valuation. In his evidence, Mr. Lopez of PAH described an evaluation as an economic assessment for the owner of the property to put it into production considering investment requirements, operating costs and other considerations for the assessment of the economic merits of a property. Mr. Bowie of KPMG likened the approach to an assessment of damages or lost profits.
301  Although the language in PAH's report on occasion used the word "valuation", I will say here that I do not accept the criticism directed at them to the effect that they applied a valuation analysis but did so improperly. The approach of PAH and KPMG was clear; at most the issue is one of semantics and not one of substance or of employed methodology.
302  Behre Dolbear also prepared valuations as at different dates. The November 2008 valuation is the one on which I will focus because it is the closest in time to when I have concluded the mine would have begun operations.
303  In its valuation as at November 2008, Behre Dolbear arrived at the following values and assigned the following weightings for each of the four methodologies described above (dollars are in millions):
304  The <damage type = "other">$9.82</damage> million figure used for the prior transaction, namely Mr. Davila's purchase price, was based on a purchase price of <damage type = "other">$12 million</damage> and then adjusted to the <damage type = "other">$9.82 million</damage> to take account of 2008 prices. In their evidence, Behre Dolbear acknowledged that they did not recognize that <damage type = "other">$6 million</damage> in royalty fees were to be paid and that the actual transaction cost was therefore <damage type = "other">$18 million</damage>.
 A.  The use of the prior transaction and its weighting by Behre Dolbear 
305  Behre Dolbear placed by far the greatest weight - 70% - on the last criteria; namely, the purchase price when Mr. Davila indirectly acquired the mine from Grupo.
306  There are several problems to this approach, apart from the error in the purchase price made by them.
307  First, the reasoning is circular. Behre Dolbear assumed that Mr. Davila purchased the property at fair market value and then used that purchase price to determine fair market value. While there was some evidence in the trial that Grupo had the property up for sale, that evidence was minimal and vague, amounting to a brochure and the evidence of Mr. De La Vega who spoke about showing people around Bolanos. While Behre Dolbear referred to other offers these were not put in evidence and the information was hearsay evidence.
308  Second, as shown by the correspondence, Mr. Ibarra assisted Mr. Davila in his negotiations with Grupo. Mr. Martinez of Grupo was Mr. Ibarra's long-time friend. That may - even to a limited extent - have affected the purchase price. (Mr. Ibarra was not called as a witness although he works for Mr. Davila's company.)
309  Finally, although I put little weight on this, Mr. Davila told the First Silver board that Grupo's asking price was a "steal".
310  More importantly and fundamentally, using a fair market approach is not one that should be taken in this case. That might be an approach to equitable compensation, depending on the nature of the case, but it is not the approach for all cases. In fact, Behre Dolbear does not doubt that the cash flow method is one valid method to determine value. In its March 2, 2012 report it said:
Although the NPV of cash flow method is an acceptable method for determination of value, it is best to use more than one method, and weight them, for a final determination of value.
311  In the case at bar, what First Silver has lost is the opportunity to acquire an asset that will produce a net revenue stream, namely profits. The fair market value approach does not take into account the ability of a plaintiff to buy an income producing asset at fair market value and realize more income out of it than the market price reflected. A similar observation was made in Kipfinch Developments Ltd. v. Westwood Mall (Mississauga) Ltd., ,  at para. 191 (S.C.J.), overturned on other grounds, :
However, in this action, the Court is required to address a different issue -- whether the plaintiff lost the ability to obtain more value from the Mall than it agreed to pay. It is not an answer to the plaintiff's claim that it lost an opportunity to obtain such profit or gain to say that Kipfinch was paying the fair market value of the Mall. The plaintiff's claim proceeds on the basis that it would have been able to capture additional value from the Mall in excess of the purchase price as a result of its ability to implement its plans for the Mall. The Court must therefore address the positive difference, if any, between the value of the Mall in the hands of Kipfinch, taking such plans into account, and the purchase price under the Agreement.
312  Finally, pegging a market price at a particular time in the past does not take into account that the approach in equitable compensation is to assess the loss with the benefit of hindsight. In view of my conclusion it is unnecessary for me to make this point but in another report, Behre Dolbear provided a valuation as at April 2012. When the prior transaction was adjusted for increased silver prices and corrected for the error made in the purchase price, the figure arrived at was <damage type = "other">$47.436 million</damage>. Therefore, if the combination and weightings of the methodologies suggested by Behre Dolbear is to be used, the prior transaction figure included in the calculation should be <damage type = "other">$47.436 million</damage>, since that applies current information to the assessment.
B. The income approach
313  I now turn to the income approach used by Behre Dolbear and PAH/KPMG, and the significance of any differences.
314  The income approach - as done by both sets of experts - is a compilation or factoring in of a series of opinions and assumptions that include:
calculation of the available resources, including recovery rates and grade of metals;
expenditures to rehabilitate the mines to enable extraction;
expenditures to rehabilitate the mill to enable the processing and extraction of the metals from the ore;
costs of mining operations;
costs of milling operations;
anticipated price of metals, especially silver; and
the discount rate to be applied.
315  As said above, the plaintiffs' expert, PAH/KPMG, arrived at an NPV of <damage type = "other">$116 million</damage>. Behre Dolbear, for the defendants, arrived at an NPV of <damage type = "other">$36.21 million</damage>.
1. Silver prices
316  As both sides' experts noted, the price of silver used in the analyses has the greatest effect on the ultimate outcome. Behre Dolbear used the average price of silver and the other metals to be mined from the second and third quarters of 2008. In their analysis, those prices remained a constant for all of the assumed years of production. (For silver that was <damage type = "other">$16.07</damage>/oz.) That flowed, in whole or in part, from their view that they were providing a valuation that had to be based on information available at the November 2008 valuation date. They described their approach:
A principal tenet of such valuations is that information incorporated in the valuation must be information that was available as of the "as at date" of the valuation. In other words, a valuation of a mining property based upon, say, a June 30, 2007 event (e.g. a sale, taking, etc.) must be based upon information known as of June 30, 2007 and information from future dates is not considered relevant to the valuation.
317  PAH used actual metal prices up to 2011 (when their report was prepared). For 2011 they used the average prices from January to December, adjusted slightly downward for conservatism. For dates beyond that, PAH relied on the Scotia Capital Equity Research Daily Edge for Metals and Minerals and the Analysis of London Metal Exchange Annual Prices from 1950 to 2010, and Projected 2011. They used an eight-year rolling average. This means that eight consecutive years are averaged and as the period moves forward, the earliest year is dropped and a new year is added at the end. They said of this methodology:
These two sources of information are authoritative, and widely accepted standard reference sources for the international mining industry, and 8-year rolling average prices are commonly used by major mining corporations for future short- and long-term projections.
318  I do not think that Behre Dolbear's approach is the correct one to use in an equitable compensation claim. Fixing the price of silver as at a valuation date that is several years before the trial does not accord with the principle that compensation is to be based on what is known at the time of trial with the full benefit of the hindsight that provides.
319  In their submissions, the defendants acknowledge the use of a five-year trailing average has had the effect of dampening a 2011 spike in silver prices, but point to the fact that in later years, the use of the average results in PAH using silver prices that are, in fact, higher than the Scotia Capital Long Term Projections. That may be correct, but it is only for the last four years of the projection. Further, the defendants have provided no analysis as to how different assumed prices would affect the result and all I have is the Behre Dolbear analysis, which I have concluded is not the appropriate one to use. The defendants have not adduced an opinion that in an economic projection (as opposed to a valuation pegged to a specific point in time) it is inappropriate to use the eight-year rolling average used by PAH and in turn KPMG.
2. Resource estimates
320  The resource estimate used by the experts in their various reports has been somewhat of a moving figure, with Behre Dolbear largely agreeing with PAH who in turn based their opinion on Grupo documents and assays.
321  In their final 2011 report PAH adjusted their estimate upward from what they had previously given in a 2010 report. While Behre Dolbear agreed with that upward adjustment, it says it should not be factored into its as-at 2008 valuation, which had been based on the lower estimate. This was based on the principle that valuations must only use information known at the valuation date. In other words, the experts agree on the resources that are in the ground now, but Behre Dolbear has not taken those agreed resources into account in their analysis for 2008.
322  Once again, that does not reflect the "hindsight principle" applicable to equitable compensation.
3. Capital and mining costs estimates
323  The defendants direct a number of criticisms towards PAH's estimated capital costs for the mine refurbishment, ongoing capital costs for exploration and ongoing mining costs. Yet, Behre Dolbear's estimated costs are considerably lower than those of PAH. All other things being equal, this would, of course, result in a lower profit and therefore NPV. Further, virtually all of these criticisms are un-quantified.
324  I do not propose to go through the individual critiques. The estimates of PAH appear to me to be reasonable.
4. Costs of mill restoration
325  PAH estimated that the cost of rehabilitating and adapting the La Huichola mill at Bolanos in order to handle ore from mining operations would be approximately <damage type = "other">$8 million</damage>. This included the construction of a tailings facility and infrastructure expenses. Behre Dolbear's estimate to do the same in 2008 was <damage type = "other">$16.5 million</damage>.
326  Without doing a line-by-line comparison, the overall difference may be explained by two large items, both of which were focussed on by each side. The first relates to the approach given to the existing equipment in the mill. The second is the cost of a new tailings dam.
a) Mill improvements done by MMM
327  By the time the experts went to visit the mill, MMM had already improved it in order to process Mr. Davila's tailings from across the river. (I explain the facts related to this more fully below, in sub-section D dealing with the claim for lost revenue for processing these tailings.) It had rehabilitated half of the grinding lines, half of the flotation circuits, half of the classification circuits and installed concentrate piping to transport concentrates to the leaching facility.
328  The defendants provided to Behre Dolbear the costs that MMM said it spent on the improvements - <damage type = "other">$4.2 million</damage>. In its report, Behre Dolbear used that as the value of the existing improvements when it visited the mill. It then estimated additional costs to bring the mill into production.
329  PAH's approach was to identify the equipment in place and to then estimate what additional improvements were required. This gives no value to the improvements paid for by MMM and the plaintiffs recognize that the actual costs of refurbishment must be added. That amount is controversial and is the subject I address in this section.
330  The amount spent by MMM was the subject of an accounting report prepared by an accountant, Mr. Fernandes, who testified at the trial. That report had not been written at the time Behre Dolbear prepared its report. The information used by Mr. Fernandez in compiling his report was the subject of further evidence by two other witnesses, Victor Perez, a Mexican public accountant and employed by MMM as its general accountant, and Guillermo Villasenor, an electro-mechanical engineer and operations manager at the Bolanos mine and mill since 2007.
331  Mr. Villasenor had previously worked as superintendent of mechanical and electrical and maintenance for MIBOSA from 1985 to 1992, when Bolanos was previously operational. He knew the equipment that had been there when it was operational, and he was able to assess the extent to which the mill and related buildings and mine had deteriorated and required repair and remediation.
332  At MMM, Mr. Villasenor worked with the engineers in planning the refurbishment of the mill in 2007 and was involved in the ordering of the equipment. He recorded the delivery of equipment and material and directed it to its appropriate location on the site.
333  Mr. Villasenor described with specificity the nature of the repairs and remediation. He described the process by which materials, equipment and manpower were allocated to the repair and remediation of the various elements at Bolanos. He described the accounting process from the operational end, including the various engineers' meetings to determine what was required, and recording the tasks undertaken by the workers. Further, he described how the accounting information was forwarded to the defendants' accounting office in Guadalajara.
334  Mr. Perez was responsible for overseeing the entry of all expenses into the MMM accounting system. He was also responsible for the accounting expenditures. Mr. Perez described the accounting system and the tasks undertaken by the individuals he supervised. He described receipt of underlying information for the accounting from the Bolanos site.
335  Mr. Perez assembled the invoices, journal entries and other supporting documents. These formed the basis of Mr. Fernandez's report and constituted 15 binders that were not marked as exhibits at trial, but were available for use by counsel in examining or cross-examining the witnesses.
336  Mr. Fernandez's report showed that the expenses relating to the refurbishment were <damage type = "other">$5.6 million</damage>. As indicated above, the report was not written at the time Behre Dolbear did their report and they used a cost of <damage type = "other">$4.2 million</damage>.
337  In seeking to challenge the credibility of the expense analysis, plaintiffs' counsel cross-examined on approximately seven invoices out of the 15 binders, down to the level of one invoice for 500 kgs. chorizo sausage. I consider that they were all properly explained as expenses related to the refurbishment or construction of the mill. (The chorizo invoice was explained as food for the construction workers.)
338  Aside from the attempted challenge based on the seven individual invoices, the plaintiffs maintain that MMM is bound by the capital costs shown on their financial statements. The plaintiffs rely on the principles enunciated in R. v. Wood, .
339  In R. v. Wood, financial records were given by a lawyer to a Law Society investigator pursuant to the lawyer's obligations under the Barristers and Solicitors Act. The lawyer was later charged with wrongful conversion of funds held in trust for his clients. The issue was whether the records could be admitted at trial for the truth of their contents. The court applied the "documents in possession" rule, described as:
113 A frequently cited description of this doctrine is from M.N. Howard et al. (eds.) Phipson on Evidence (15th, 2000) at [paragraph] 30-10:
Documents which are, or have been, in the possession of a party will, as we have seen, generally be admissible against him as original (circumstantial) evidence to show his knowledge of their contents, his connection with, or complicity in, the transactions to which they relate, or his state of mind with reference thereto. They will further be receivable against him as admissions (i.e. exceptions to the hearsay rule) to prove the truth of their contents if he has in any way recognised, adopted or acted upon them. So, as we have seen, documents which a party has caused to be made or knowingly used as true in a judicial proceeding to prove a particular fact, are admissible against him in subsequent proceedings to prove the same fact, even on behalf of strangers. Documents furnished by persons specifically referred to for information are evidence against the referrer; though a mere general reference will not have this effect. (citations omitted)
340  The Court of Appeal held that the accused lawyer had adopted the truth of the documents by handing them to the Law Society investigator. They were therefore admissible for the truth of their contents.
341  It might be, and I need not decide, that MMM's financial statements are admissible for the truth of their contents. But that does not mean they may not be contradicted or supplemented by other evidence, even by the party who produced them. I do not think the "documents in possession" rule goes that far, and the plaintiffs cited no authority to that effect. To hold otherwise would amount to an estoppel and in that regard I note the plaintiffs placed no reliance on the financial statements nor did they plead estoppel.
342  Mexican accounting standards were not put before me. Even assuming the financial statements mischaracterised capital items as expenses (so that they could be written off immediately), that would not prevent MMM from taking a different position at trial, although it might affect the credibility of that evidence. The question before me is what was expended on the refurbishment and that is to be based on all of the evidence.
343  I note that PAH did not provide their own opinion of the value of MMM's improvements. Their only comment on the <damage type = "other">$4.2 million</damage> figure used by Behre Dolbear was that it "seemed high".
344  I accept that the Fernandez report, together with the other backup evidence, establishes that MMM spent <damage type = "other">$5.6 million</damage> on rehabilitating the mill.
b) The tailings dam cost
345  Both PAH and Behre Dolbear estimated costs for a tailings storage facility. PAH's plan provided for a dry-stack tailings facility at a cost of <damage type = "other">$3.5 million</damage>. Behre Dolbear's estimate included a tailings pond at a cost of <damage type = "other">$3.8 million</damage>.
346  Behre Dolbear's <damage type = "other">$3.8 million</damage> was in turn comprised of $3.4 million for studies related to the construction and permitting, and an actual construction cost of <damage type = "other">$400,000</damage>. The amount related to the studies was unsubstantiated. Even allowing for several hundred thousands of dollars for studies, the cost of a tailings pond would be less than <damage type = "other">$1 million</damage>.
347  There was also an issue relating to whether land would be available on which to construct a dry tailings facility. Mr. Davila testified that there was land available in the area and there is no reason to think a dry tailings facility could not be constructed.
c) Conclusion on the costs of the mill restoration
348  Adjusting for the differences in the tailings storage cost (Behre Dolbear's number is too high) and the value to be given to the improvements paid for by MMM (PAH's number is too low), the assumed costs of the mill restoration are roughly the same for each sides' experts. As mentioned above, that deals with the overall figures arrived at, and not a line-by-line item comparison and analysis. But that detailed type of critique was not done by either sides' experts of the other sides' report and I have focussed on what the parties have focussed on.
5. Discount rate for assumed pre-trial earnings
349  Both PAH/KPMG and Behre Dolbear applied discount rates to their projections. PAH described the concept and purpose as:
The discount rate in a cash flow analysis represents the opportunity cost of capital, a return that has to be met for any new project to proceed. The general purpose of a discount rate is to factor into the net present value the risk that the projected revenues will not be achieved, considering factors such as the political, social labor and economic situation in the area where the mining property is located.
350  The report went on to give some examples of the contingencies taken into account:
Mexico is, in general, a stable and favourable environment for mining. There are many foreign mining companies with mining operations in Mexico. If, for example, the Bolanos mine were located in more difficult or politically riskier environment for mining, or if the cash flow projections in the report were more aggressive, this could result in a higher discount rate.
351  Mr. Bowie of KPMG gave a more general definition and described the approach taken by him:
A discount rate is employed to convert future cash flows to their net present value. The discount rate is intended to reflect the rate of return expected by an investor, having regard to the perceived risks and opportunities with respect to the investment and the underlying prospects, including the inherent risks of achieving the projected cash flows. Rate of return expectation are also referenced to the indicated returns available on comparable, or relatively comparable investments.
In commenting on an appropriate discount rate, we considered the risk and opportunities related to the Bolanos Mine opportunity, the risks associated with achieving projected results and the leverage inherent in the opportunity as at the respective Acquisition Dates. ...
352  The main difference and therefore dispute between the parties with respect to discount rates is this. For the assumed pre-trial income, KPMG (taking the assumed annual earned income figures from PAH) applied no discount rate. It did discount projected post-trial earnings. On the other hand, Behre Dolbear applied a discount rate to all years.
353  The plaintiffs say there is no need to apply a discount rate to assumed past earnings because things such as political risk and the price of silver up to the time of trial are known. The plaintiffs argue that any pre-trial uncertainties, if recognised at all, should be dealt with as a contingency.
354  The plaintiffs also point out that the defendants have no expert report that directly questions KPMG's approach and the only criticism in the Behre Dolbear report was that KPMG did not compound the assumed earnings. That, of course, would have increased the final number.
355  I agree with the plaintiffs that the risks which would be incorporated in a discount rate for assumed past earnings are mostly known at the time of trial for assumed past earnings; for example, the political risks in Mexico and the price of silver. That said, the past earnings are assumed and there are some risks which could not be known at the time of trial. An unanticipated geotechnical challenge is one example. They can be taken into account when determining what contingency, if any, should be applied, which I will deal with later.
C. Conclusion on the income approach
356  As the courts have said numerous times, determining compensation is a process of assessment and not calculation. While I have scrutinised the analyses done by the experts, and in particular those aspects to which counsel have drawn my attention, it would not be appropriate or possible for me to do a line-by-line item analysis picking and choosing different aspects from the different reports in order to arrive at a number.
357  For the reasons I have given, I do not think that the valuation approach of Behre Dolbear is the appropriate one for this case. Even their discounted income analysis on its own is influenced by the valuation approach in that it is based on silver prices as at the time of the valuation, as opposed to what is known about those prices at the time of the trial. Once again, I do not think that reflects what the law says is the approach to be taken in equitable compensation in a case of this nature. This should not be taken as bringing Behre Dolbear's professionalism or qualifications into account; rather, it is a matter of determining which approach best fits the law and the case.
358  Focussing on the discounted income analysis only, apart from the issue of silver prices that I have addressed separately, PAH's analysis was more conservative than Behre Dolbear. The one exception was that pertaining to the value to be attributed to the work on the mill done by MMM. That was more or less offset by the higher price Behre Dolbear attributed to the construction of the tailings dam. Given the magnitude of the numbers involved I would not make any adjustment to the PAH numbers.
359  Therefore, subject to the issue of contingencies, I accept the figure arrived at by PAH/KPMG of <damage type = "other">$116 million</damage>, subject to one adjustment. As I said above, PAH gave no value to the improvements to the mill by MMM and the plaintiffs recognize that the actual cost of refurbishment must be added as an expense. I found that to be <damage type = "other">$5.6 million</damage>, and the income must accordingly be reduced. This leaves a net figure of <damage type = "other">$110.4 million</damage>. (It might be that a further adjustment is required because of the net present value calculations and I leave that to the parties to bring back before me if necessary.)
360  I conclude with this observation. I found that First Silver would have acquired Bolanos at the beginning of 2007 and production would have started one year later, and determined the equitable compensation on that basis (above, para. 292). I considered and rejected the defendants' argument that the mine would not have been developed then because silver prices had fallen (above, para. 290). But if the defendants were correct and the mine would have been developed later, I note that the net present value in the Behre Dolbear analysis as at December 31, 2011 was <damage type = "other">$158 million</damage>.
 D.  The claim for lost revenue from processing Mr. Davila's tailings 
361  The plaintiffs claim compensation for the processing of the tailings that Mr. Davila owns across the river from the Bolanos mine (above, para. 14).
362  Some additional facts are required to understand this claim. One of the major attractions of the Bolanos property for Mr. Davila was that, with some refurbishment, he was able to use the Huichola mill on it to process his tailings. (As I explained initially, the ownership of those tailings is not in issue.)
363  Between 2007 and 2011, the defendants used the mill to process what the plaintiffs' expert estimated to be 2.4 million tons of the tailings. The tailings were reground and then refloated to produce a silver-lead concentrate. Until August 2010, the tailings resulting from this process were put into a tailings pond on the Bolanos property, known as El Potrero. After that the defendants put the tailings into a pond located on property owned by them, known as Los Machetes. They had been completing Los Machetes over time before the spill, and after the spill were rapidly able to bring it into use.
364  The plaintiffs say that if they had acquired Bolanos, Mr. Davila would have paid them a fee to process his tailings; he would have been compelled to do so because there was no other suitable facility in the area. Further, he would have had to use the tailings pond on the Bolanos property.
365  The point about Mr. Davila being compelled to use Bolanos if owned by the plaintiffs is also echoed in the quantum of their claim. There were two possible fee models referred to by the experts. One would result in a fee of <damage type = "other">$4.2 million;</damage> the other <damage type = "other">$27 million</damage>. The plaintiffs say, "There is no reason to believe that the Plaintiffs would have agreed, or would have been compelled to agree, to total compensation of $4,200,000 when they could have earned some <damage type = "other">$27,063,000</damage> ..." That, of course, assumes Mr. Davila would have been forced to not only process his tailings at Bolanos but also to pay the higher fee.
366  In spite of the significance of the amount claimed, not much evidence was devoted to this claim. For example, the only evidence of the non-availability of other mills in the area was the plaintiffs' expert having said that he had not heard of any. While is true that Mr. Davila wanted Bolanos to process the tailings, there was no evidence as to the economics of Mr. Davila being able to build a small mill on his own property to process the tailings in comparison to the alternative of paying the plaintiffs the <damage type = "other">$27 million</damage> fee claimed by them.
367  Looking at the matter from the plaintiffs' point of view, the parties did discuss the processing of tailings in September 2006 (above, para. 93) as part of the settlement of their dispute and what was then the deadlock with Grupo. Mr. Neumeyer proposed that First Silver would acquire Bolanos and process Mr. Davila's tailings for a fee. However, the scenario I am here considering is what the situation would have been had the plaintiffs acquired Bolanos in the ordinary course of business and without the interference of Mr. Davila. In this regard, there was no evidence called on whether it would have been economic to the plaintiffs to process the tailings as opposed to processing an increased volume of their own ore. I am mindful of the plaintiffs' expert saying:
Total capacity of the plant, with all machinery functional, would be about 2,000 tonnes per day; however, given that there is only one discharge belt from the fine ore bins, this limits the production rate to about 1,000 tons per day.
However, there was no analysis as to whether it would have made more sense to put in another belt and ramp up ore production as compared to processing the tailings.
368  PAH said that tailings could be processed in parallel with fresh ore from the mine if modifications were made to the plant for a cost of <damage type = "other">$500,000</damage>. This presumably refers to a modification over and above what the rest of their report called for as being necessary refurbishments to process ore alone. However, elsewhere in their report they indicated this would not be something that would ordinarily be planned for:
In the processing plant, once it is restored, crushed ore would be conveyed from the fine ore bins by a single belt to the 6 by 12 ft. ball mill. Though this mill is currently used as an open-circuit ball mill in reprocessing tailings, it is likely, based on Mr. Addison's [the expert at PAH responsible for this aspect of the report] observations, that it served as a rod mill when processing fresh ore and would again function as a rod mill if the plant were placed back in operation for processing fresh ore.
369  Finally, Mr. Neumeyer stressed several times in his evidence that First Majestic was in the business of operating silver mines. Counsel also stressed this in their argument. I did not take that to include operating a mill in order to process someone else's product.
370  With respect to the use of the tailings pond on the Bolanos property, I agree with the defendants' submission that they would not have been forced to use that because they were able to switch over to Los Machetes dam when El Potrero failed. They could have done that sooner if need be.
371  I therefore cannot conclude that the plaintiffs would have found it desirable to process the tailings or that Mr. Davila would have been compelled to use Bolanos for that. In my view the plaintiffs have not made out this aspect of the claim, even on the equitable standard of causation.
E. Contingencies
372  As I have said, the purpose of applying contingencies to a damage award assessing the value of a lost opportunity is to take into account the possibilities that the opportunity might not have come to fruition or, as per Olive Hospitality, whether a financial advantage would have accrued (above, para. 247).
373  With respect to the quantification of the award, in the case at bar, contingencies with respect to the risks involved in the mining project itself were accounted for in the discount rate applied to the income evaluation.
374  Further, PAH's capital and operating cost estimates were recognised by them to have an accuracy of +/- 25%.
375  Therefore a contingency is left to be considered mainly for two things:
the possibility that First Silver would not have, for one reason or another, acquired Bolanos; and
as I left open (above, para. 355), the uncertainty relating to the assumed post-trial earnings which were not discounted by the plaintiffs' experts.
376  The plaintiffs point to the case of McCormick Delisle & Thompson Inc. v. Ballantyne . The plaintiff was a management consultant who advised clients on how to change their manufacturing processes to make their operations more efficient. The defendants were key employees who left the plaintiff and secured contracts with potential clients of the plaintiff using confidential information, primarily the plaintiff's proposals to those clients. The trial judge assessed damages and then applied a 25% contingency. As described by the Court of Appeal:
20 The trial judge's final step was to calculate the appropriate contingency. The judge remarked that customers in the industry under consideration seemed "somewhat fickle, bearing in mind the quickness with which GSW jumped ship". Recognizing that "it may be somewhat arbitrary - contingencies usually are", the trial judge assigned 25% and reduced the figure to <damage type = "other">$30,324.00</damage>. The appellant was therefore awarded judgment against all four respondents jointly and severally for this amount.
The Court of Appeal held it was an error and said:
30 I also disagree with the 25% contingency deduction applied by the trial judge. I think it is obvious from what has been said above, that when the damages claim is treated as a misappropriation of four specific customers who had been persuaded to, and did in fact, reorganize their businesses, there should be no such arbitrary across the board deduction.
377  There at least two distinctions between that case and the one at bar. First, the Court of Appeal based its ruling on the fact that even though the consulting contracts were terminable on 30 days' notice, it would be unlikely for a customer to make a switch in mid-stream because it would be locked into the manufacturing changes the consultant would be advising on. Therefore the "fickleness" noted by the judge was not correct. Second the clients had, in fact, moved from one firm to the other.
378  The case at bar is more complex and more uncertain. It cannot be said that it was a certainty that the plaintiffs would have wanted to acquire Bolanos after conducting the due diligence, that they would have successfully concluded a deal with Grupo or that they would have been able to finance the acquisition.
379  I note that in Rec Holdings, Satanove J. listed a large number of "may haves" and applied a contingency of 25%. There was no specific evidence directed at quantifying the likelihood of any of the contingencies occurring.
380  A complex case of this nature depends on numerous assumptions, all with some degree of uncertainty. Those uncertainties cannot be proved with any precision, yet that does not mean they should be ignored. That would fly in the face of the principle that the role of the court is to assess, and not calculate, compensation. It would also be a result that does not accord with common sense, and be unfair to a defendant.
381  I conclude the appropriate contingency is 15%.
 F.  Conclusion on the amount of equitable compensation 
382  I assessed the loss of First Silver at <damage type = "total">$110.4 million</damage> (above, para. 359). Applying the 15% contingency to that results in a compensation figure of $US <damage type = "total after">93.84 million</damage>.
 VIII. OTHER MATTERS 
383  Having determined liability on the basis of breach of fiduciary duty, it is unnecessary for me to deal with the tort claims. As the plaintiffs have acknowledged, any remedy that would be granted for them would completely overlap with the remedy I granted for breach of fiduciary duty.
384  Similarly, it is unnecessary for me to deal with the claim of El Pilon and the jurisdiction and choice of law issues that it entails, as El Pilon's claims overlap completely with those of First Silver.
385  I have assessed the loss in U.S. dollars because that was used by all the experts. Under the Currency Act, , the final judgment must be expressed in Canadian dollars. The parties may make submissions as to the time of conversion and the applicability of the Foreign Money Claims Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 155.
386  The matter of pre-judgment interest and costs was left to be dealt with after my judgment. The effect of Mr. Davila's counterclaim and orders requiring payment from Mr. Church's trust account may be dealt with at the same time, including interest on the counterclaims.
387  I have dealt with Mr. Davila's breach of fiduciary duty to First Silver who assigned its claim to First Majestic. The assignment was absolute and under s. 36 of The Law and Equity Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c.253, the cause of action is vested in the assignee and the assignor no longer has a cause of action: Supreme Steel Ltd. v. Pacific Industrial Services Ltd., ,  (S.C.) at para. 19. Therefore it appears to me that the judgment should be in favour of First Majestic only. However, the plaintiffs' position on that was not entirely clear and if necessary I will hear further submissions on that.
388  The defendants did not question that MMM was wholly or partly controlled by Mr. Davila and that as owner of Bolanos it would be jointly and severally liable for Mr. Davila's wrongs. Judgment will therefore go against it as well as Mr. Davila.
E.M. MYERS J.
* * * * *
* * * * *
CORRIGENDUM
Released: June 17, 2013
[1] E.M. MEYERS J.:-- In my Reasons for Judgment issued April 24, 2013, there have been amendments made to paragraphs 52, 69, 80, 113, 130, 212, 228, 232, 233, 238, 242, 248, 298, 315, 359 and 382 on June 17, 2013.
E.M. MEYERS J.
* * * * *
CORRECTION
Released: April 26, 2013
[1] E.M. MYERS J.:-- Please be advised that the attached Reasons for Judgment of Mr. Justice Myers dated April 24, 2013 have been amended as follows:
In the Table of Contents on page 2, FACTS should be numbered as: II. FACTS
E.M. MYERS J.
* * * * *
Corrigendum
Released: September 25, 2013
[1] In my Reasons for Judgment issued April 24, 2013, paragraph 323 has been amended.
E.M. MYERS J.
End of Document
Koshman v. Brodis, [2013] B.C.J. No. 755
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
W. Ehrcke J.
Heard: February 25-28 and March 1, 2013.
Judgment: April 16, 2013.
Docket: M113929
Registry: Vancouver
[2013] B.C.J. No. 755   |
Between Everley Koshman, Plaintiff, and Brandi Brodis, Defendant
(85 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Physical injuries — Body injuries — Soft tissue — Arm injuries — Elbow — Action by Koshman for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident allowed — As Koshman drove into an intersection, the front of the defendant Brodis' vehicle struck the driver's side door of her car — Brodis acknowledged responsibility after the collision and entered the intersection against a red light — Brodis was 100 per cent responsible for the accident — Koshman suffered soft tissue injuries and required surgery to remove glass from her elbow — She had to retrain so she could obtain less physically demanding employment — Koshman was awarded $137,980 in damages.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Retroactive loss of income — Special damages — Non-pecuniary loss — Pain and suffering — Affecting recreational activities — Action by Koshman for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident allowed — As Koshman drove into an intersection, the front of the defendant Brodis' vehicle struck the driver's side door of her car — Brodis acknowledged responsibility after the collision and entered the intersection against a red light — Brodis was 100 per cent responsible Koshman v.for the accident — Koshman suffered soft tissue injuries and required surgery to remove glass from her elbow — She had to retrain so she could obtain less physically demanding employment — Koshman was awarded <damage type = "total">$137,980</damage> in damages.
Tort law — Negligence — Motor vehicles — Liability of driver — Action by Koshman for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident allowed — As Koshman drove into an intersection, the front of the defendant Brodis' vehicle struck the driver's side door of her car — Brodis acknowledged responsibility after the collision and entered the intersection against a red light — Brodis was 100 per cent responsible for the accident — Koshman suffered soft tissue injuries and required surgery to remove glass from her elbow — She had to retrain so she could obtain less physically demanding employment — Koshman was awarded $137,980 in damages.
Action by Koshman for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident. As Koshman drove into an intersection, the front of the defendant Brodis' vehicle struck the driver's side door of her car. Both parties claimed that they entered the intersection on a green light. Koshman and a neutral civilian witness testified that Brodis acknowledged responsibility after the collision. Brodis denied doing so. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 The Court was satisfied that Brodis did acknowledge responsibility after the collision and that she entered the intersection against a red light. Brodis was therefore 100 per cent responsible for the accident. Koshman was 22 years old at the time of the accident. She suffered soft tissue injuries and required surgery to remove glass from her elbow. She suffered considerable pain and discomfort and had to retrain so she could obtain less physically demanding employment. The prognosis for her becoming pain-free was poor. Koshman was awarded <damage type = "total">$137,980</damage> in damages, which included <damage type = "general">$60,000</damage> in general damages, <damage type = "past wage loss">$46,881</damage> for past income loss, <damage type = "future wage loss">$15,000</damage> for loss of future earning capacity, <damage type = "future care">$8,556</damage> for the cost of future care and <damage type = "special">$7,543</damage> in special damages.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Motor Vehicle Act, (1), s. 144(1)
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: A.K. Khanna.
Counsel for the Defendant: M.A. Crawford.
[Editor's note: A corrigendum was released by the Court April 25, 2013; the corrections have been made to the text and the corrigendum is appended to this document.]
Reasons for Judgment
W. EHRCKE J.
Introduction
1  The plaintiff, Everley Koshman, claims damages for injuries suffered in a motor vehicle accident with the defendant, Brandi Brodis. Both liability and quantum of damages are in issue.
Circumstances of the Accident
2  The accident occurred at around 4:45 p.m. on August 7, 2009 at the intersection of Fraser Highway and 206 Street in Langley, British Columbia. It was a sunny day, and the roads were dry. It was a Friday rush-hour, and traffic was relatively busy.
3  At that location, Fraser Highway is one-way as one approaches the intersection from the west heading eastbound. As eastbound traffic approaches the intersection, there are three lanes: one for left turns, one for right turns, and a centre lane for through traffic. Fraser Highway becomes a two-way street to the east of the intersection. At that intersection, 206 Street is two-way for both southbound and northbound traffic. Approaching the intersection from the north there are three southbound lanes: one for left turns, a centre lane for through traffic, and a curb lane for through traffic.
4  The speed limit in the area is generally 50 km/h, but for eastbound traffic on the one-way portion of Fraser Highway it is 30 km/h.
5  Traffic at the intersection is controlled by a stop light. There is conflicting evidence as to who had the green light at the time of the accident, but certain facts are not in dispute.
6  The plaintiff was driving her 1999 Toyota Corolla eastbound on Fraser Highway. Approaching the intersection, she was in the centre through lane. There were vehicles to her left and right in the other two eastbound lanes of Fraser Highway.
7  The defendant was driving her truck southbound on 206 Street. She was in the curb lane for through traffic heading southbound. There was a vehicle to her left waiting to turn east onto Fraser Highway.
8  As the plaintiff drove her car into the intersection, the driver's side door of her car was struck by the front of the defendant's truck. The impact smashed in the driver's door and broke the window of the plaintiff's car and caused it to spin around approximately 180 degrees.
9  The defendant got out of her truck and spoke to the plaintiff through the broken window of the driver's door to see if she was all right. Police and emergency services personnel attended. A Jaws of Life device had to be used to extract the plaintiff from her car, and she was taken to Langley Hospital. The defendant's truck was considered a write-off. Various witnesses gave statements to the police.
10  The plaintiff says that she entered the intersection on a green light, and the defendant must have been going against a red light. The defendant says that the light was green for her when she entered the intersection, and she could not stop when the plaintiff pulled into the intersection in front of her. Both parties claim that the accident was not their fault.
11  Mr. Vlieg, the Director of Engineering for the City of Langley testified about the operation of the traffic signal at this intersection. He said that there are traffic sensors embedded in the pavement one metre behind the stop bar for eastbound traffic on Fraser Highway. When the light turns green for eastbound traffic, it stays green for at least 7 seconds, but the computer will add additional time in 3 and one-half second increments up to a maximum of 30 seconds if it senses traffic on the traffic sensors. He said that typically, two to three cars can pass through the intersection per 7 second interval. At the end of the green cycle, the light turns amber for three and one-half seconds. It then turns red for vehicles in all directions for a further three and one-half seconds before turning green for southbound vehicles on 206 Street.
12  It follows that if the plaintiff entered the intersection while the light was green for eastbound vehicles, then at least seven seconds would elapse before the light would turn green for southbound vehicles. That would normally be more than enough time for eastbound vehicles to completely clear the intersection before southbound traffic began to move through the intersection, thus preventing the type of T-bone collision that occurred here.
13  Although both the plaintiff and the defendant say they had the green light, one of them must be mistaken. A determination of who had the right of way requires further analysis of the evidence.
Liability
14  The plaintiff testified that when the accident occurred, she was alone in her car driving towards her home in Aldergrove after having gotten off work and exercising at the gym. When she approached the intersection, the light was red, and she stopped her car behind three or four other vehicles. When the light changed to green, she entered the intersection and was hit by the defendant when she was part way through. She was going less than 30 km/h. She did not see the defendant until she was hit. She testified that she is certain that the light was green when she entered the intersection. She testified that the defendant came up to speak to her at the scene and said: "I'm so sorry; it's completely my fault; are you okay?"
15  In cross-examination the plaintiff said she was certain that the light had not turned yellow or red when she entered the intersection. She said that she was in the centre lane, and at some point she went past a vehicle to her left in the left-turn lane.
16  Dan Fontaine witnessed the accident. He was driving an SUV, and his fiancée was a passenger in the vehicle. He was going southbound on 206 Street. He saw the light for southbound traffic turn yellow, and he stopped when the light turned red. He was the first car in the left turn lane. As he waited there for the light, he saw traffic proceeding eastbound on Fraser Highway in front of him. While the light was still red for southbound traffic, he saw the defendant's truck pass him on the right and proceed at about 40 km/h into the intersection and collide with the plaintiff's car. He testified that he was fully stopped at the time, and there is no possibility that the light had turned green for southbound traffic when the defendant entered the intersection. He testified that after the collision, the defendant jumped out of her truck and said, "Oh my God, it's my fault, I didn't see the red light."
17  Amanda Scott was Mr. Fontaine's passenger at the time. He had picked her up after work, and they were stopped southbound on 206 Street in the left-turn lane at the intersection. She testified that the light was red for southbound traffic, and she saw eastbound traffic proceeding through the intersection. She then saw the defendant's truck pass her on the right and enter the intersection at full speed. She thought the defendant had her arm up to her head as if talking on a cell phone, but she could not be sure of this.
18  Angelica MacDonald was driving eastbound on Fraser Highway behind the plaintiff as they approached the intersection. She testified that the car in front of her, that is, the plaintiff's car, entered the intersection on a green light, but the light then turned yellow, and Ms. MacDonald stopped her car. She did not see what colour the light was for the defendant's southbound vehicle when it entered the intersection and struck the plaintiff's vehicle.
19  In cross-examination, she acknowledged having given a recorded statement to a police officer at the scene in which she said that the eastbound light had turned red, but she said that her present belief is that the light was green when the plaintiff entered the intersection, but that it changed by the time her car, which was behind the plaintiff's, reached the intersection. Her previous statement to the police appears to be somewhat inconsistent with her trial testimony, and for that reason, I can place only limited weight on the reliability of her account.
20  The defendant testified that after doing some shopping at Safeway, she was driving her truck to the Casino to see her boyfriend. She had spoken to him on the phone a few blocks before, but she said she was not on her cell phone or otherwise distracted when she approached the intersection. She was driving southbound in the curb lane of 206 Street. She said she entered the intersection while the light was green. She said the light had been green for some time as she approached. She proceeded into the intersection without slowing and did not see the plaintiff until she was right in front of her in the intersection. She applied her brakes at the last minute, but it was too late to avoid a collision. She said the light only turned yellow once she was in the intersection, just before the impact.
21  She got out of her truck and apologized to the plaintiff, but she did not mean to convey that the accident was her fault. She testified that if she said "It's my fault" it was just because she hit the plaintiff, and not because she was admitting liability.
22  She denied saying to anyone at the scene, "Oh my God, I'm so sorry, I didn't see the red light."
23  Robert Yates, an off-duty RCMP officer, was alone in his vehicle going eastbound on Fraser Highway at the time of the accident. He testified that the light turned amber as he approached the intersection, and he stopped in the left-turn lane. A few seconds later, as he was waiting for the light to turn green, the plaintiff's car proceeded eastbound through the intersection and the defendant's southbound vehicle collided with it. He looked at the light after the collision and saw that it was green for southbound traffic at that time.
24  If this were a criminal case and responsibility for the accident had to be determined beyond a reasonable doubt, I would not have been able to say who had the green light based on the criminal standard. However, this is not a criminal case. Factual issues are to be determined on a balance of probabilities. As it is the plaintiff who brought the suit, she bears the onus of proving the defendant's liability on a balance of probabilities. I am satisfied that she has met that onus.
25  In total, there were six witnesses to the accident who gave evidence. The plaintiff and three other civilian witnesses testified that the plaintiff had a green light when she entered the intersection. In contrast, the defendant testified that she is the one who had a green light when she entered the intersection. An off-duty police officer testified that he stopped his vehicle when the light turned amber for eastbound traffic, and the plaintiff entered the intersection sometime after that
26  A determination should not be made simply by counting the number of witnesses on each side, nor is the testimony of an off-duty police officer necessarily of more weight than that of a civilian witness.
27  Clearly, different people at the scene saw things differently, and have different memories of how this accident occurred. That is not particularly unusual in a trial such as this.
28  What is somewhat unusual in this case is that both the plaintiff and a neutral civilian witness, Mr. Fontaine, testified that after the collision the defendant acknowledged responsibility. The plaintiff testified that the defendant said to her at the scene that the accident was her fault. The defendant testified that if she said this, she did not mean to imply that she admitted liability. Mr. Fontaine testified that the defendant said to him, "Oh my God, I'm so sorry, I didn't see the red light." The defendant denies having said those words.
29  I do not accept the defendant's explanation for what she said to the plaintiff at the accident scene, and I do not believe her denial of what she said to Mr. Fontaine. I am satisfied on a balance of probabilities that she did say these things, and she did so because she was aware that she had entered the intersection against a red light.
30  Despite the testimony of the defendant and of Mr. Yates, I find that it is likely that the plaintiff entered the intersection on a green light. It is possible, though less likely, that she entered when the light was just turning yellow. I am satisfied that she did not enter against a red light. If the light was turning yellow, I find that she did not have sufficient time to safely stop her vehicle before entering the intersection. Even if the light was turning yellow for eastbound traffic, according to the evidence of Mr. Vlieg, the plaintiff should have had almost seven seconds to safely clear the intersection: three and one-half seconds before the light for eastbound traffic turned red, and another three and one-half seconds before the light turned green for southbound traffic.
31  Regardless of whether the plaintiff entered the intersection on a green light or if she entered as it was just turning yellow, I am satisfied on a balance of probabilities that the defendant entered the intersection against a red light without even attempting to slow down until she was already in the intersection and the collision was imminent.
32  Sections 129(1) and 144(1) of the Motor Vehicle Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 318 provide:
129 (1) Subject to subsection (2), when a red light alone is exhibited at an intersection by a traffic control signal, the driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection and facing the red light must cause it to stop before entering the marked crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no marked crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and subject to the provisions of subsection (3), must not cause the vehicle to proceed until a traffic control signal instructs the driver that he or she is permitted to do so.
...
144 (1) A person must not drive a motor vehicle on a highway
without due care and attention,
without reasonable consideration for other persons using the highway, or
at a speed that is excessive relative to the road, traffic, visibility or weather conditions.
33  The defendant had a duty of care to the plaintiff and other users of the highway. Her manner of driving was negligent and not in accordance with the standard of care required by ss. 129(1) and 144(1) of the Motor Vehicle Act. I am satisfied that the plaintiff's driving was not negligent.
34  I find that the defendant is 100% responsible for the accident, and that the plaintiff was not contributorily negligent.
Effects of the Accident
35  The plaintiff is now 25 years old. She was 22 at the time of the accident.
36  After graduating from high school, she worked as a receptionist and as a waitress for a couple of years, but then decided to follow her mother's career and become a care aid. In 2008 she took the necessary training and then started work as a care aid at the Simpson Manor, a long-term care home with about 100 beds. She worked on an on-call basis. She found the work physically strenuous, as it requires lifting and moving patients, but this was not a problem because she was healthy and physically fit. She enjoyed the work and found it rewarding.
37  In her spare time, the plaintiff enjoyed hiking, jogging, swimming, snowboarding, and other outdoor activities. She went to the gym five times per week.
38  She had been in a previous motor vehicle accident in 2005, but she had no lingering effects.
39  As a result of the accident with the defendant on August 7, 2009, she suffered injuries to the left side of her body, including glass in her elbow. She had bruising from the lap and shoulder belts. At hospital, they removed some the glass from her elbow. She received seven stitches. A laceration to her left ear was bandaged. For the next two weeks, her whole body was sore and stiff. She had bad headaches. Her lower back was very sore. She could not straighten her elbow. About a year after the accident, she had to have further surgery to remove more glass from her elbow.
40  On the advice of her doctor, she attended a total of 55 physiotherapy sessions from October 29, 2009 to April 19, 2011.
41  Her family doctor told her not to work, and she remained off work until December 28, 2009.
42  When she returned to work, she found that she needed the assistance of others to carry out her tasks as a care aid. She was only able to do a couple of shifts per week, as she was in great pain at the end of a shift, and she found that working made her condition worse.
43  The continuing effects of the accident were described by the plaintiff and confirmed by various other witnesses, including her mother and some co-workers and friends. In addition to the pain and headaches, most of which resolved after about eight months, she became anxious about driving, and her mood was depressed.
44  Even after eight months, she continued to have pain and limited use of her left arm, which was aggravated by her work as a care aid. She realized that she could not continue to work as a care aid, and she decided to train as a Licensed Practical Nurse, since she understood that this work would be less physically demanding. She took an eight-month L.P.N. training program from September 6, 2011 to May 11, 2012.
45  She now works on a casual basis as an L.P.N. at Peace Arch Hospital and at Simpson Manor. She takes occasional shifts as a care aid in order to get enough work to pay her bills.
46  The plaintiff continues to have left elbow pain, although it is not as bad as it was before. She also has pain in her left hand, which is especially aggravated when doing such tasks as wringing wash cloths.
47  She has returned to physical activities at the gym, but is still limited in things like weight lifting. She is afraid of returning to such activities as snowboarding because she fears hurting her arm.
48  She testified that she enjoyed her work as a care aid, and before the accident, she had no plans to become an L.P.N. She had considered the possibility of one day trying to become a Registered Nurse, and this may be something that she tries to pursue in the future. If so, the fact that she is now an L.P.N. may make it possible for her to satisfy the R.N. requirements in a shorter period of time.
49  The plaintiff called two expert witnesses: her family doctor, Dr. Budau, and her physiatrist, Dr. Caillier. The defence called an orthopedic surgeon, Dr. Leith, who was not a treating physician, but who provided a report based on his review of the records and his examination of the plaintiff on November 1, 2012.
50  Both the experts for the plaintiff and for the defence agree that the plaintiff sustained glass abrasions, lacerations, and embedment of glass fragments in her left arm as a result of the accident, as well as soft tissue injuries and some scarring.
51  Most of the symptoms resolved after eight months, but the plaintiff continues to experience problems with her left arm and hand. Dr. Leith does not attribute these ongoing symptoms to the accident, and in his opinion, she should not have any continuing restrictions on her activities.
52  Dr. Caillier wrote two reports, one dated August 30, 2011, and another dated November 16, 2012, based on several follow-up visits of the plaintiff, the most recent being October 9, 2012, when she reported worsening elbow pain.
53  In her November 16, 2012 report, under the heading "Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis, Dr. Caillier gave the following opinion:
DIAGNOSES AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
Anxiety. I will defer to my colleagues in Psychology to discuss this further.
Chronic soft tissue pain involving the left forearm. It remains my opinion that Ms. Koshman likely sustained a soft tissue musculoligamentous injury involving her forearm as a result of the motor vehicle accident of August 7, 2009. It is my opinion that this has resulted in chronic soft tissue pain involving the flexors and extensors to the wrist.
She continues to have soft tissue forearm pain and in my opinion these residual symptoms are directly attributable to and a result of the motor vehicle accident on August 7, 2009.
At times, she has had improvement in her symptoms but depending on her activity, her pain can flare.
When last seen, she had evidence of an extensor carpi ulnaris tendonitis and in my opinion this is unlikely related to the motor vehicle accident in question. But she continued to still have soft tissue forearm pain which, in my opinion, is still residual to the motor vehicle accident of August 7, 2009.
Prognosis: Given the chronicity of her intermittent forearm pain, the likelihood of Ms. Koshman becoming pain free is poor. She is likely to have ongoing symptoms now and beyond the next 12 months and activities that require repetitive wrist motion will likely flare her symptoms.
Recommendations: To manage these symptoms in the long term she does need to continue to do her exercises on a regular basis for the elbow, wrist and hand. If she does not continue to do these on a regular basis, there will likely be increased flares of her pain, depending on the activity that she is doing as an L.P.N. or even in the future as a nurse.
I am recommending that a provision be considered for at least 4 physiotherapy sessions per year to assist in times of symptomatic flares.
Limitations and Restrictions: Provided that she continues to do the forearm and wrist exercises on a regular basis, it is my opinion that she is unlikely to be limited or restricted as a result of her chronic pain whether it is her work, home or recreational life.
Chronic elbow pain. It is my opinion that Ms. Koshman has chronic elbow pain and this involves both the medial and posterior aspects of the elbow. This is intermittent in nature and it appears to depend on what she is doing as far as activity wise. It remains my opinion that these symptoms are a direct result of and directly attributable to the motor vehicle accident of August 7, 2009.
Ms. Koshman has been seen by Dr. Thomas Goetz as well as had an MRI and there is no evidence to suggest posterior impingement of the elbow. Certainly, during the most recent examination she no longer has a clinical examination which would be consistent with this particular diagnosis.
It is my opinion that at the present time, she does not have posterior impingement of the elbow.
The pain that she experiences within the middle and ring fingers appears to have subsided. She no longer has clinical evidence to suggest irritability of the left ulnar nerve.
She no longer has evidence of medial epicondylitis. However the medial aspect or inside of her elbow tends to be aggravated when she is involved in activities that require her to grasp things or with repetitive motions of the wrists.
Prognosis: It is my opinion that given the chronicity of Ms. Koshman's intermittent left posterior and medial elbow pain that the likelihood of her becoming pain free is poor. She is likely to have ongoing intermittent pain now and beyond the next 12 months. The pain will likely depend on what she is doing activity wise.
It is my opinion that the main limiting factor for her to participate in activities of her choosing is the left elbow pain, whether this is within the posterior or medial aspect.
Recommendations: I am recommending that she continue her exercise routine on a 3 to 4 week basis. She would benefit from having equipment within her home to continue with a regular strengthening program for the elbow and forearm.
As recommended previously, a provision for at least 4 physiotherapy sessions per year to assist in times of flares would likely prove beneficial in managing her symptoms in the long term.
Limitations and Restrictions: Activities that involve repetitive wrist motions and repetitive pushing and pulling are problematic for her. From time to time these activities will likely aggravate her symptoms and as such she will likely have to pace and prioritize her activities.
It is my opinion that despite her limitations and restrictions that she is capable of participating in her activities as an L.P.N. and nurse but will need to be diligent with her exercise routine to allow for long term management of her pain.
It remains my opinion that as far as working as a Registered Nurse, Ms. Koshman is capable of doing this, but there may be times with heavier pushing or pulling, as well as having to transfer patients and repetitive wrist motions that there will be a flare of her left elbow pain and as such she may require assistance from co-workers to complete the heavier duties.
Recreationally, she is capable of being involved in an independent exercise program and she should focus on continuing to increase the strength of the muscles about the elbow and wrist regions to provide her with long term management of her symptoms This will be a lifelong activity.
With heavier-based activities around the home, it is my opinion that she is capable of doing these, but at times may have to pace and prioritize. depending on what is occurring with the left elbow. She is unlikely to require household assistance.
Provided that she is able to improve upon her strength involving the left elbow and wrist, it is my opinion that she will likely be able to snowboard, but will have to be cautious when she is pushing herself up off the ground as previously weightbearing through the elbow would increase the pain.
54  Counsel for the defendant placed emphasis on Dr. Caillier's comment that the plaintiff had evidence of an extensor carpi ulnaris tendonitis that in her opinion is not likely related to the accident, and submitted that this shows that any continuing disability of the plaintiff is likewise unrelated to the accident. In my view, however, that conclusion would be inconsistent with Dr. Caillier's comment that despite the tendonitis, the plaintiff "continued to still have soft tissue forearm pain which, in my opinion, is still residual to the motor vehicle accident of August 7, 2009."
55  On the basis of Dr. Caillier's evidence, I am satisfied that the plaintiff continues to have chronic intermittent soft tissue forearm pain and chronic intermittent elbow pain resulting from the motor vehicle accident, and that the prognosis for her becoming pain free is poor.
General Damages
56  In Stapley v. Hejslet,  at para. 46 our Court of Appeal discussed some of the factors that ought to be considered when assessing non-pecuniary damages:
The inexhaustive list of common factors cited in Boyd [Boyd v. Harris, ] that influence an award of non-pecuniary damages includes:
age of the plaintiff;
nature of the injury;
severity and duration of pain;
disability;
emotional suffering; and
loss or impairment of life;
I would add the following factors, although they may arguably be subsumed in the above list:
impairment of family, marital and social relationships;
impairment of physical and mental abilities;
loss of lifestyle; and
the plaintiff's stoicism (as a factor that should not, generally speaking, penalize the plaintiff: Giang v. Clayton, , ).
57  The plaintiff submits an appropriate award for general damages in this case would be <damage type = "other">$80,000</damage>. The plaintiff relies on three cases:
De Gaye v. Bhullar, ;
Kardum v. Asadi-Moghadam, ; and
Taylor v. Grundholm, .
58  In the first two of those cases, the award for general damages was <damage type = "other">$70,000</damage>. In the third, it was <damage type = "other">$90,000</damage>, less 10% for failure to mitigate with physiotherapy.
59  The defendant submits that the appropriate award for general damages should be in the range of <damage type = "other">$20,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$30,000</damage>. The defendant relies on Chan v. Kao, , where general damages were <damage type = "other">$22,000</damage>, and Bumby v. Dumaine, , where they were <damage type = "other">$18,000</damage>.
60  While the cases referred to by counsel are useful in illustrating the range of damages that courts have awarded in previous cases, each case is unique and must be decided on its own specific facts. The defendant's submission on general damages is based in part on the proposition that whatever residual left arm pain the plaintiff continues to suffer is not causally related to the accident. I do not accept that proposition. As explained above, I am satisfied on all the evidence, and particularly the evidence of Dr. Caillier, that the plaintiff's continuing symptoms are a result of the accident. Accordingly, I do not accept that the range of general damages should be as low as submitted by the defendant.
61  On the other hand, I am not satisfied that the facts of this case call for damages as high as suggested by counsel for the plaintiff.
62  The plaintiff, who was 22 at the time of the accident, suffered considerable pain and discomfort that initially had a serious effect on her life, preventing her from working at the job she loved and from engaging in the active physical lifestyle that she previously enjoyed. The worst of the effects resolved within about eight months. However, the plaintiff's life continues to be negatively impacted by the residual effects of the accident. Dr. Caillier opined that the long-term management of her symptoms with an appropriate exercise program will be a lifelong activity.
63  In all the circumstances, and considering the factors mentioned in Stapley v. Hejslet, I would assess general damages for pain, suffering, and loss of amenities of life at <damage type = "general">$60,000</damage>.
Past Income Loss
64  The defendant does not dispute the plaintiff's claim for the time she was off work from August 8, 2009 to December 27, 2009. The gross amount of those lost wages is <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">$18,145.30</damage>.
65  The plaintiff also claims <damage type = "other">$26,235.72</damage> for lost wages during the period from September 6, 2011 to May 11, 2012 while she was studying for the L.P.N. program. The defendant submits, however, that the plaintiff has personally benefitted from taking the L.P.N. training, and she is not entitled to compensation by the defendant for this effort at self-improvement. The defendant points out that the plaintiff now has the option of a shortened period for obtaining her R.N. qualifications as a result of her training as an L.P.N.
66  In my view, the plaintiff is entitled to an award for her lost wages while training as an L.P.N. as this was a reasonable effort on her part to mitigate damages. She found that as a result of the accident, she was not able to work at full capacity at her former job as a care aid. Had she not retrained, she would have had a continuing, accident-related, limitation on her ability to earn income. It is to the defendant's benefit that the plaintiff mitigated this loss by retraining. As Southin J.A. observed in Palmer v. Goodall  (C.A.) at p. 59:
In many cases, a plaintiff may show that in order to earn as good a living as before i.e. to restore his earning capacity he requires retraining. The cost of retraining, if it is a reasonable proposition, is a proper element of compensation.
67  Finally, the plaintiff claims that as a result of her physical limitations following the accident, she was forced to work fewer hours during the periods January to April 2010 and May 11, 2012 to the present, and she should be awarded <damage type = "other">$2,000</damage> for each of those periods. I find the claim for the first period is easier to justify, based on the limitation on the number of hours she would work as a care aid after the accident, but the claim for the period after her L.P.N. training is more problematic, as the rationale for that training was to allow her to get back to full-time work. I would award a total of <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">$2,500</damage> to cover both periods.
68  Accordingly, I find that the plaintiff has established past loss of income amounting to <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">$18,145.30</damage> for the period August 8, 2009 to December 27, 2009, <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">$26,235.72</damage> for the period of L.P.N. training, and <damage type = "sub-past wage loss">$2,500.00 for the other periods, for a total of <damage type = "past wage loss">$46,881.02</damage>. That is a gross amount, and I leave it to the parties to calculate the net amount for the purposes of the entered order.
Loss of Future Earning Capacity
69  Future earning capacity is considered a capital asset whose value may be diminished by the effects of an accident. The factors to be considered in assessing such loss were discussed in Kwei v. Boisclair  (C.A.) at p. 399. There, the British Columbia Court of Appeal referred with approval to the list set out in Brown v. Golaiy  at p. 356 (S.C.), as follows:
The means by which the value of the lost, or impaired, asset is to be assessed varies of course from case to case. Some of the considerations to take into account in making that assessment include whether:
The plaintiff has been rendered less capable overall from earning income from all types of employment;
The plaintiff is less marketable or attractive as an employee to potential employers;
The plaintiff has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities which might otherwise have been open to him, had he not been injured; and
The plaintiff is less valuable to himself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market.
70  The plaintiff's pattern of employment income may be discerned from her yearly T-4 slips:
2008 $13,611.48 
2009 $14,277.02 
2010 <damage type = "other">$24,942.38</damage> 
2011 <damage type = "other">$25,506.93</damage> 
71  As can be seen, the plaintiff's employment income has risen each year, despite the accident. This does not necessarily mean, however, that she is not entitled to any compensation for loss of earning capacity.
72  As our Court of Appeal recognized in Rosvold v. Dunlop, , what is being compensated under this head of damages is not simply a mathematical calculation of lost projected future earnings, but rather the impairment of earning capacity considered as a capital asset. The Court went on to say at paras. 9-11:
[9] Because damage awards are made as lump sums, an award for loss of future earning capacity must deal to some extent with the unknowable. The standard of proof to be applied when evaluating hypothetical events that may affect an award is simple probability, not the balance of probabilities: Athey v. Leonati, . Possibilities and probabilities, chances, opportunities, and risks must all be considered, so long as they are a real and substantial possibility and not mere speculation. These possibilities are to be given weight according to the percentage chance they would have happened or will happen.
[10] The trial judge's task is to assess the loss on a judgmental basis, taking into consideration all the relevant factors arising from the evidence: Mazzuca v. Alexakis,  (S.C.) at para. 121, aff'd  (C.A.). Guidance as to what factors may be relevant can be found in Parypa v. Wickware, , supra, at para. 31; Kwei v. Boisclair  (C.A.); and Brown v. Golaiy  (S.C.) per Finch J. They include:
[1] whether the plaintiff has been rendered less capable overall from earning income from all types of employment;
[2] whether the plaintiff is less marketable or attractive as an employee to potential employers;
[3] whether the plaintiff has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities which might otherwise have been open to him, had he not been injured; and
[4] whether the plaintiff is less valuable to himself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market.
[11] The task of the court is to assess damages, not to calculate them according to some mathematical formula: Mulholland (Guardian ad litem of) v. Riley Estate  (C.A.). Once impairment of a plaintiff's earning capacity as a capital asset has been established, that impairment must be valued. The valuation may involve a comparison of the likely future of the plaintiff if the accident had not happened with the plaintiff's likely future after the accident has happened. As a starting point, a trial judge may determine the present value of the difference between the amounts earned under those two scenarios. But if this is done, it is not to be the end of the inquiry: Ryder (Guardian ad litem of) v. Jubbal,  (C.A.); Parypa v. Wickware, supra. The overall fairness and reasonableness of the award must be considered taking into account all the evidence.
73  The plaintiff claims <damage type = "other">$150,000</damage> for loss of future earning capacity, based on the evidence of Dr. Caillier that the plaintiff continues to have some residual problems with her left arm that affect her ability to do physically demanding tasks.
74  If the plaintiff were still working only as a care aid, this would be a significant concern. However, she is now qualified as an L.P.N., which is less physically demanding, and Dr. Caillier said that her physical limitations resulting from the accident should not prevent her from working either as an L.P.N. or as a Registered Nurse. The defendant therefore submits that no award should be made for loss of future earning capacity.
75  I agree with the defendant that the plaintiff's continuing physical limitations should not prevent her from pursuing her career goals of working either as an L.P.N. or as an R.N., and therefore do not merit an award in the range of <damage type = "other">$150,000</damage> as submitted by counsel for the plaintiff.
76  However, I agree with the plaintiff that she does deserve some compensation for the fact that she will continue to experience some minor limitation in carrying out heavier tasks, even though this limitation is not so severe as to prevent her employment in her chosen career. As Dr. Caillier put it:
It is my opinion that despite her limitations and restrictions that she is capable of participating in her activities as an L.P.N. and nurse but will need to be diligent with her exercise routine to allow for long term management of her pain.
It remains my opinion that as far as working as a Registered Nurse, Ms. Koshman is capable of doing this, but there may be times with heavier pushing or pulling, as well as having to transfer patients and repetitive wrist motions that there will be a flare of her left elbow pain and as such she may require assistance from co-workers to complete the heavier duties.
77  It is difficult to put a precise dollar value on this. On the one hand, this is a relatively minor limitation in relation to her chosen field of work. On the other hand, the plaintiff is still young, and she will have to bear the effects of this limitation for many years. In my assessment, the plaintiff is entitled to damages of <damage type = "future wage loss">$15,000</damage> for this minor limitation on her future earning capacity, considered as a capital asset.
Cost of Future Care
78  Dr. Caillier recommended a provision for physiotherapy sessions when needed at times of symptomatic flare-ups. The plaintiff submits that Dr. Caillier recommended provision for eight sessions per year, four for elbow pain and another four for left forearm pain. I do not agree that that is a reasonable interpretation of her report. As I read her report, she recommends provision for four sessions per year in total. The plaintiff has been paying <damage type = "other">$50</damage> per session at Brookswood Physiotherapy. Applying the appropriate multiplier to age 65 based on an annual cost of <damage type = "other">$200</damage> per year, I would award a total of <damage type = "future care">$4,278</damage> for the cost of future care.
Special Damages
79  The plaintiff claims special damages in the amount of <damage type = "other">$7,543.37</damage> and has provided receipts. The defendant agrees to <damage type = "other">$2,945.29</damage> for amounts relating to such things as physiotherapy and medication, but disputes three items.
80  First, there is a claim for <damage type = "other">$83.96</damage> for gym membership fees during the initial period when the plaintiff could not attend the gym. The defendant submits the plaintiff should have cancelled her membership for that period. I do not agree. I accept the plaintiff's evidence that it would have been more expensive to cancel the membership and recommence it.
81  Second, the defence disputes the claim of <damage type = "other">$51.86</damage> for an elbow brace, as Dr. Caillier's report said it was only something to consider in the future, and not something that she recommended now. In my view, the expenditure was reasonable and justified.
82  Finally, the plaintiff claims her tuition expenses for training as an L.P.N. The evidence of the plaintiff is that she had not planned to train as an L.P.N. prior to the accident. I have found that she did so in order to mitigate her income loss as a result of the accident. The claim for tuition expenses is an appropriate claim under the heading of special damages.
83  Accordingly, I would award special damages in the amount claimed by the plaintiff, namely, <damage type = "special">$7,543.37</damage>.
Summary
84  I find that the defendant was negligent and that she is 100% liable for the plaintiff's damages resulting from the accident. I assess those damages as follows:
 General Damages: <damage type = "general">$60,000.00</damage> 
 Past Income Loss (Gross): <damage type = "past wage loss">46,881.02</damage> 
 Loss of Future Earning Capacity: <damage type = "future wage loss">15,000.00</damage> 
 Cost of Future Care: <damage type = "future care">4,278.00</damage> 
 Special Damages: <damage type = "special">7,543.37</damage> 
 TOTAL: <damage type = "total">$133,702.39</damage> 
85  This total includes the gross amount for past income loss. The parties have agreed that they will calculate the net amount for the purposes of the final entered order.
W. EHRCKE J.
* * * * *
CORRIGENDUM
Released: April 25, 2013
[1] W. EHRCKE J.:-- This is a corrigendum to reasons for judgment issued April 16, 2013.
[2] The last sentence of para. 78 of my reasons is amended to reflect a change to the calculation of the cost of future care. The amended sentence is to read as follows:
Applying the appropriate multiplier to age 65 based on an annual cost of <damage type = "other">$200</damage> per year, I would award a total of <damage type = "future care">$4,278</damage> for the cost of future care.
[3] The summary of damages at para. 84 of my reasons is amended to read as follows:
 General Damages: <damage type = "general">$60,000.00</damage> 
 Past Income Loss (Gross): <damage type = "past wage loss">46,881.02</damage> 
 Loss of Future Earning Capacity: <damage type = "future wage loss">15,000.00</damage> 
 Cost of Future Care: <damage type = "future care">4,278.00</damage> 
 Special Damages: <damage type = "special">7,543.37</damage> 
 TOTAL: <damage type = "total">$133,702.39</damage> 
W. EHRCKE J.
End of Document
Gill v. A&P Fruit Growers Ltd., [2009] B.C.J. No. 593
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
New Westminster, British Columbia
N. Brown J.
Heard: December 15-18, 2008 and February 13, 2009.
Judgment: March 27, 2009.
Docket: S93335
Registry: New Westminster
[2009] B.C.J. No. 593   |   2009 BCSC 412   |   176 A.C.W.S. (3d) 1199
Between Amardeep Singh Gill, Plaintiff, and A&P Fruit Growers Ltd., Defendant
(122 paras.)
Case Summary
Tort law — Negligence — Contributory negligence — Apportionment of liability — Action for damages resulting from a slip and fall accident allowed in part — Plaintiff alleged he fell out of back door of defendant's double wide mobile home which had no stairs or landing at back door — Defendant alleged plaintiff fell at his home — Defendant in mobile home drinking with two of defendant's employees — Plaintiff's version supported by the evidence — Although plaintiff was nor warned of danger, some care on his part would have cautioned plaintiff to check before stepping out into the darkness without any hesitation — Plaintiff 30 per cent liable..
Tort law — Occupiers' liability — Dangerous premises — Duty of occupier — To invitees — Knowledge of danger — Duty to warn — Action for damages resulting from a slip and fall accident allowed in part — Plaintiff alleged he fell out of back door of defendant's double wide mobile home which had no stairs or landing at back door — Defendant alleged plaintiff fell at his home — Defendant in mobile home drinking with two of defendant's employees — Plaintiff's version supported by the evidence - Defendant owed duty of care to plaintiff as invitee — Defendant failed to warn of danger of missing landing and to ensure users of mobile home were reasonably safe.
Action for damages resulting from a slip and fall accident. The defendant owned a double wide mobile home located on the defendant's blueberry farm. The plaintiff alleged that he was injured when he stepped outside and fell to the ground, because there was no landing or stairs leading from the mobile home. The defendant denied that the plaintiff fell when leaving the mobile home but argued that the plaintiff fell down stairs at the plaintiff's house. The defendant argued that the door in question was strapped with two two-by-fours that were placed horizontally across the doors and screwed into the door frame at the time of the incident. The witnesses for both sides were all connected through family relationships or friendships. All witnesses and the plaintiff had attended a wedding reception prior to the incident and had consumed considerable amount of alcohol. After the reception, the plaintiff and two friends, who worked at the defendant farm, wanted to continue drinking at the mobile home. One of the men then asked the plaintiff to come outside the mobile home. It was dark at the time. The plaintiff alleged he exited the back door and fell. 

HELD: Action allowed in part.
 The plaintiff was 30 per cent negligent. The objective and circumstantial evidence supported the plaintiff's version of events. The defendant's evidence was rejected. The door was not boarded up the night that the plaintiff opened it and fell to the ground. The plaintiff fell out of the back door, which had no deadbolt. Neither employee warned the plaintiff about the danger. No signs were posted in the unit. The plaintiff was an invited and welcome guest at the material time. The plaintiff was therefore not a trespasser and the defendant owed him the standard of care owed an invitee. The defendant, as owner of the lands and premises and employer of the plaintiff's friends was ultimately responsible for the repair and maintenance of the premises. Section 6 of the Occupiers Liability Act extended the duty of care owed by a landlord to its tenant to any invitee of those tenants. The defendant failed in its duty to take the care that in all the circumstances of this case was reasonable to see that a person in the double wide would be reasonably safe using it. The plaintiff was not warned about the absent landing and stairs. A modicum of care would have, however, cautioned the plaintiff to check before stepping out into the darkness without any hesitation at all.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Occupier Liability Act, , s. 3(3.2), s. 3(3.2)(b), s.
3(3.3), s. 6, s. 6(1), s. 6(2), s. 6(3), s. 6(3)(a), s. 6(4)
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: S.T. Cope.
Counsel for the Defendant: M.W. Buhler.
Reasons for Judgment
N. BROWN J.
1 INTRODUCTION 
1  This is a slip and fall case. Liability is the only issue, damages set aside pending this decision. The central question is this: where did the plaintiff fall and hurt himself, on premises owned by the corporate defendant as the plaintiff claims, or at his own home as the defendant claims?
2  The plaintiff says that at 1:08 a.m. June 20, 2004 he opened a door in a double wide mobile home, expecting to step outside onto a landing. He describes turning the handle, pushing the door and stepping out, not onto the expected landing and stairs, but into the darkness and thin air, falling over a meter to the ground, which resulted in a compound fracture of his left tibia and fibula.
3  The corporate defendant, owner of the 30 acre Abbotsford blueberry farm where the double wide was set up, admits the plaintiff was in the mobile home at the time the plaintiff says, but denies this is the place where the plaintiff fell and injured himself. The defendant called witnesses to testify that the plaintiff suffered his fractures after falling down a set of stairs leading up to a patio at the back of the house (located at Cottonwood Street, Mission, B.C.), where the plaintiff lived with three of the defence witnesses, one of them his sister.
4  All the potential eyewitnesses to the fall, in whichever disputed place it happened, are bound by bonds of family or friendship. The plaintiff's own sister, Jasbir Bath, and the plaintiff's brother in law Sikander Bath, both testified against him. The only other potential eyewitness, Parmajit Gill, a friend of both Sikander Bath and the plaintiff, testified over a month after I had heard all the other evidence. This delay came about at the defendant's request because Mr. Gill was out of the country at the time and counsel persuaded me there was due diligence on his part and that Mr. Gill was an important eyewitness for the defence. I therefore granted a continuance. However, when Mr. Gill finally did testify, he did not say what the defence expected him to say, instead, he confirmed the plaintiff's claim that he had fallen at the double wide, not at home.
5  Each party called a biomechanical expert to support their version of events. Their evidence is not pivotal to my final decision, but I will discuss it later below in due course.
6  Apart from the obvious question about who speaks the truth about the location of the fall that resulted in the plaintiff's serious fractures, the defendant raised two evidentiary objections and three defences that I have also to deal with. The first evidentiary objection relates to the Mission Hospital Emergency Admitting Notes, and in particular a notation on the record that states that the plaintiff was injured after a fall from a trailer. The plaintiff alleges this information came from Sikander Bath, who did not deny his presence or provisioning of at least some of the information given to the admitting clerk at the time. I did not admit this record into evidence for reasons given below. The second evidentiary issue relates to cell phone records showing the time that a cell phone call was made by the plaintiff to Sikander Bath, and likewise the times that certain cell phone calls were made by Sikander Bath to his wife Jasbir Bath. These records were produced by Rogers pursuant to a court order upon the plaintiff's application and at a cost to him of <damage type = "other">$1,500</damage>. These records give the timing of certain calls that the plaintiff, Sikander Bath and his wife admit they made. The timing of these calls is important. I admitted these records into evidence for limited purposes for reasons discussed later in these reasons.
7  The defendant also argued, should I accept the plaintiff's claim that he fell on the defendant's property, that the plaintiff was there for a recreational purpose, and as such, he was a trespasser, thus resulting in a lower standard of care owed to him by the defendant and in this case arguably met by the defendant. The defendant further argues, the plaintiff's recreational intention and defendant's agricultural purposes aside, that the plaintiff did not have the owner's permission to be on the property: The plaintiff was thus a trespasser and here again the defendant met the required standard of care owed him as a trespasser. If I should reject those arguments, the defendant says that the evidence shows that the plaintiff's own actions were the cause of his injury, or alternatively he was negligent and that I ought to find a high degree of contributory negligence.
8  After an overview of some of the most pertinent evidence, I will set out the reasons for my evidentiary rulings, analyze a segment of the facts in a little more detail, then make my findings on the location of the fall, and conclude with a consideration of the defences raised.
2 OVERVIEW 
9  Besides being the brother in law of the plaintiff, principle defence witness Sikander Bath is also connected to the corporate defendant, since it employs him and his brother, Sukhminder Bath, owns all the company's shares. Sikander Bath manages the defendant's blueberry farm and oversees all its day to day operations for him. Defence witness Parmajit Bath worked on the farm too, more or less as a field hand. As noted earlier, the plaintiff and these two men were long time friends. The plaintiff and sole shareholder Sukhminder Bath also knew one another, but not well.
10  Parmajit Gill lived part-time in the double wide mobile home, which also served as an office for the farm operation. He lived about half the time on Cottonwood, the other half of the time in the double wide.
11  Sikander Bath was responsible for the day to day operation of the farm, and was given a free hand by his brother to run it more or less as he saw fit, although his brother kept a close eye on production costs, with his attention focused on the financial end of the farm operation.
12  The plaintiff, Sikander Bath and Parmajit Gill had been at a Cloverdale wedding reception that evening with Sikander's wife Jasbir Bath and other family and friends. The three men drank throughout the evening and continued on drinking after returning to the double wide trailer situated on the defendant's farm. The three were experienced drinkers. Jasbir Bath, the plaintiff's sister and Sikander's wife, had dropped them off at the farm and then drove herself to the Cottonwood Street Mission home where she and her husband Sikander Bath testified that the plaintiff later fell down the stairs leading up to their backyard patio. It was a short drive home from the Townshipline farm because the farm and their Mission home were not far apart, about a seven to twelve minute drive, with little traffic that time of night.
13  I heard considerable evidence and argument about events leading up to the time that the three men were dropped off by Jasbir Bath, mostly concerning routes taken to the farm and the Cottonwood home, who was in which SUV, whether the Hummer was left at the farm after Mrs. Bath left and so on. But there was no controversy that at some point on the return trip from the Cloverdale wedding, passengers switched between the two SUV's, ending with Jasbir Bath driving the three men - the plaintiff, Sikander Bath and Parmajit Gill, to the Townshipline, Abbotsford farm in a an SUV. As noted already, Jasbir Bath left the men at the farm as they had decided to continue socializing and drinking. I heard some unpersuasive testimony from Mrs. Bath and Sikander Bath about a conversation at the farm that was supposed to show that the men stayed only at the plaintiff's insistence and that he was not a welcome guest at the farm.
14  The heart of this case lies in what happened next. The men drank more whiskey in the double wide trailer set up on the farm. This double wide was used as an office, lunch room/rest area for workers and as part-time residence of Parmajit Gill. Suffice for now to say that the defence theory agrees with the plaintiff that at around 1:08 a.m. the plaintiff called Sikander Bath, who was outdoors at the time, walking to the pump house. Sikander Bath received that 1:08 a.m. call from the plaintiff. He says the plaintiff called in order to tell him they were out of whiskey, so he wanted to go home. The plaintiff agrees that he called Sikander Bath; but says it was in order to tell him that he had just fallen out of the trailer, was hurt and could not get up. Before phoning, he had called out for help, but neither Parmajit Bath or Sikander Bath showed up, so he decided to try reaching Mr. Bath by cell phone. The plaintiff says that after Mr. Bath received the call he and Mr. Gill came by, Sikander Bath and Mr. Gill tried to lift him, but could not because he was too heavy, so Mr. Gill brought a tractor around, lowered the bucket to the ground and the men slid him into it. They then travelled a short distance to a place near the front of the double wide and from there into the back of the Escalade that his sister Jasbir Bath had driven over from Mission to the farm in response to a 1:12 a.m. call made to her by her husband Sikander Bath. The Baths testified that Mrs. Bath had come over to the farm in order to drive the men home; the plaintiff says Mrs. Bath had come over in response to his injury and his need to get to hospital. The only thing the parties agree on here is that Sikander Bath called his wife Jasbir Bath to come to the farm. The plaintiff says he had asked Sikander to call an ambulance but he refused because "there was no blood," hence the necessity for Mrs. Bath to drive to the farm and take him to hospital.
15  There is also no question that Sikander Bath placed a second call to his wife at about 1:24 a.m., 12 minutes after the first call; Sikander Bath said that this call was made to find out where she was. As it turned out, just about the time the call was made, Mrs. Bath told Sikander Bath that she was turning into the farm's driveway. She drove up the driveway and picked up the three men up, either in no hurry at all because she was there only to take all three home to bed, or more urgently and to the hospital, is the critical question that must be answered in the plaintiff's favour or see him non-suited.
16  The evidence confirmed that it would take about seven to twelve minutes to drive from the farm to Mission General Hospital, depending on traffic conditions and speed: in an emergency situation, with no traffic to contend with that early in the morning, likely less time.
17  The Cottonwood home where the plaintiff, Sikander Bath, his wife, and Parmajit Gill lived-at least part of the time-is within about two blocks of the Mission Hospital.
18  The defendant contends that the three men and Jasbir Bath drove to Cottonwood. Sikander Bath testified that they were in no hurry since they were just going home to bed. In that case, the trip from the Townshipline farm to Cottonwood could have taken 15 minutes or longer.
19  What follows now is an outline of the defendant's version of events leading up to the plaintiff's injuries.
20  When they arrived at Cottonwood, Mrs. Bath got out of the car and went through the front door. Their three children, her mother and other family had arrived home earlier with Mrs. Bath, who could not have been home very long before receiving 1:12 a.m. call to drive to the farm. Meanwhile, according to Sikander Bath, the three men went around the side of the house to the back, where there was a ground level basement and stairs that led up to an outdoor patio accessible from the house through sliding doors. I do not know why they would not have gone through the front door, Sikander Bath says they did not. Instead, they went along the cement walkway at the front of the house, Parmajit in front, the plaintiff in the middle, with Sikander Bath not far behind.
21  The stairs leading up to the patio have seven treads leading up to the deck. The defence theory says that when Parmajit Gill had climbed the stairs and reached the patio and the plaintiff was at the sixth tread, he somehow lost his balance, wobbly because of alcohol the defence theory, caught his foot in the tread, and fell backwards down the stairs. The defence biomechanical expert says that the plaintiff's left foot was caught at an angle under the tread, and that as the plaintiff fell backward, this created sufficient torsion to fracture his tibia and fibula thus causing a spiral fracture, even before he had hit the cement at the bottom of the stairs. This, at least is the scenario for the mechanism of the injury offered by Dr. Peter Cripton; but it is a mechanism that finds scant support in Mr. Sikander's eyewitness descriptions of how the fall occurred.
22  Jasbir Bath and Sikander Bath then say that the plaintiff got himself up onto his side, somehow propping himself up. Parmajit Gill was then said to have requested a chair from the patio, which Mrs. Bath carried down the stairs. Then, one man on each side, they supported the plaintiff as they walked up the side of the house, prompting one to wonder why they simply did not call an ambulance, considering the pain the plaintiff must have been and the impossibility of weight bearing on the injured leg. Anyway they then managed to get him into the second row seat of the Escalade, where the plaintiff propped himself up with his legs resting on Sikander Bath's lap. The other self-evident difficulty with this picture of a man on either side of the plaintiff, who had suffered a serious compound fracture, is that Parmajit Gill testified that the plaintiff was injured after falling from the double wide, not down the Cottonwood patio stairs, and so presumably would not have been called upon there to support the plaintiff on the one side.
23  The drive to Mission Hospital would not have taken more than a minute or so to reach. There the plaintiff was transferred to a wheel chair and wheeled into emergency, where Sikander Bath testified that he dealt with registration details.
24  On the plaintiff's version during this interval, he would have been driven from the farm directly to Mission Hospital and admitted into care there. At that point, the two narratives join again.
3 EXPERT TESTIMONY ON STANDARD OF CARE AND 
 CAUSATION 
1. City of Abbotsford on Standard of Care
25  Dale Zahara is a building inspector, and works for the City of Abbotsford. He confirmed that the defendant required a building permit to place the double wide on the farm. The evidence of the lay witnesses confirms it used to be located on a cedar mill, where it had been set up sometime in May 2004. The defendant did not have a building permit for the double wide on the farm. Municipal bylaws require compliance with standards for stairs, handrails and landings.
26  He confirmed that safety is the primary concern of municipal building inspectors. He confirmed that the double wide on the farm would not have been approved for use or occupancy without a proper landing in place. If not in place, inspectors usually allow a temporary measure to make sure someone does not open the door and step out and fall to the ground. On a temporary basis only, the owner may be granted a permit if the door has a deadbolt locked from both sides, so that special knowledge or a key would be required to open the door from the inside of the unit. A double bolt is a condition of occupancy.
27  The double wide on Townshipline did not confirm with the bylaw as it had no deadbolt. However, in this case, the defendant says that the door in question was (at the time the plaintiff said he opened and walked through it) strapped with two two-by-fours that were placed horizontally across the doors and screwed into the door frame. If that is so, it is obvious that the plaintiff would not have been able to open the door and fall to the ground in the first place, and would make the whole question of standards for securing the door utterly moot. Whether the straps were on the door at the time is part of the larger question of fact for me to decide. If they were not, then the defendant obviously failed to comply with municipal standards. Further, a door unsecured by deadbolts as municipally required or shuttered in some way as the law would require, would leave the premises in an unsafe condition with a foreseeable risk of injury to people, including farm workers using the premises. Whether the defendant is guilty of that negligence depends on other findings with respect to the events on June 20, 2004.
2. Biomechanical
28  I heard from two biomechanical experts, Dennis Chimich and Dr. Peter Cripton, both well very qualified to give opinions about the biomechanical aspects of physical injuries. Both witnesses gave their evidence in what I would consider a scientific and professional way, answering questions put to them on cross-examination without evasion.
29  They agreed on methodology. They based their opinions on different factual assumptions and so unsurprisingly came to different conclusions.
30  Both witnesses describe different kinds of fracture patterns. The patterns the fractured bones exhibit on x-ray and other images can reveal how force was applied to the bone. They then compared the fracture patterns with the forces that would be involved in a fall from the trailer versus the patio stairs on Cottonwood.
31  The relevant patterns here are what are referred to as oblique and spiral patterns. These share some similarities. The main distinguishing feature is the way that a spiral fracture wraps around the bone in a spiral pattern. Both experts agree that a spiral fracture requires torsion or a twisting force be applied to the bone, similar to the forces resulting from using a monkey wrench to turn pipe. An oblique fracture involves compression, with axial forces generated up through the bone, although some bending can also be involved. Dennis Chimich assumed that the plaintiff suffered an oblique fracture; Dr. Cripton a spiral fracture.
32  Dennis Chimich when first writing his report relied on the opinion of Dr. B. Vaisler, who opined that the plaintiff had suffered a displaced oblique fracture. Dr. Vaisler's opinion was later buttressed by the November 26, 2008 report of radiologist Dr. P. Munk, prepared in rebuttal to the defence orthopaedic opinion of Dr. P. Guy, which Dr. Cripton relied on. Dr. Munk opined that the fracture was an "oblique fracture of the proximal tibia, not that of classical spiral fracture." Dr. Guy however had opined that the plaintiff's fracture was "a spiral fracture of the proximal tibia with a small amount of combination at the fracture site... caused by a torsional type load which also likely caused the proximal fibula fracture".
33  Dr. Munk's curriculum vitae reveals very impressive qualifications in his field. He serves in the radiology department at Vancouver General Hospital and on the UBC Faculty of Medicine. He has published very widely, presented, and taught many-including residents in orthopaedics.
34  Dr. Guy's curriculum vitae is also impressive. He is an assistant professor in the faculty of Medicine at UBC and has presented and lectured extensively, though not to the extent of Dr. Munk. He was qualified as an orthopaedic surgeon in 1994.
35  Dennis Chimich concluded that the plaintiff's fracture was consistent with the Townshipline injury scenario, with compression forces applied primarily through the heel of the left leg. He testified that the defendant's Cottonwood scenario that sees the plaintiff ascending the stairs, losing his balance, falling backward and coming to rest on the concrete pad at the bottom of the stairs would produce 50 to 60% of the amount of energy available at Townshipline. Further, a backwards fall is atypical, because on a stair climb the climber is moving forward, so a slip typically involves a fall forward onto the hands and knees. Further, on Dr. Cripton's scenario, he would expect to see injury to the head, shoulders and upper back, which were missing in this case, according to both experts. (The plaintiff later on did complain of aches and pains in the neck shoulder and back but neither expert found evidence of obvious injury to these areas following the injury.)
36  As noted in the overview, Dr. Cripton assumed a scenario at Cottonwood that sees the plaintiff's left foot getting hung up between the treads as the plaintiff lost his balance and fell backwards. This would produce the torsional forces necessary to produce a spiral fracture, with the break occurring as the plaintiff fell to the bottom of the "arc of his fall", and coming to rest at the concrete pad at the bottom of the stairs. Dr. Cripton acknowledged that this is not a typical fall pattern and so he could produce no literature that focused its attention on this type of scenario. He said that the general biomechanical principles of such a fall would nonetheless apply. He acknowledged that one would expect to see back injuries with such a fall, with a significant risk of a fractured neck should the back of the neck strike the edge of a tread.
37  Plaintiff's counsel cross-examined Dr. Cripton about the assumptions he relied on for both scenarios, starting with the fact that he had requested from counsel a radiological opinion upon which to base his opinion, but instead had been provided with an orthopaedic one.
38  In examining the plaintiff's fall of 3 feet 4 inches (1.01 m) from the floor of the double wide to the ground he agreed that he had not taken into account the fact that the plaintiff stated that he did not just step forward past the door sill. In such a typical case as that you would expect his forward momentum to pitch him forward and so see him fall on his knees, as proposed by Dr. Cripton. However, the plaintiff testified that he pushed the door forward and hung onto it as it swung out, from there falling down to the ground, striking the concrete apron that extended 15 inches (0.38 m) from the edge of the wall. This would have involved a more complex set of assumptions and variables unaccounted for in the simpler set of assumptions used by Dr. Cripton.
39  Dr. Cripton conceded that while in his opinion the Cottonwood scenario would produce more (torsional) force on the leg and be more likely to produce the spiral fracture he had assumed, the Townshipline scenario, even using his assumptions and estimations, would still produce sufficient force to cause a compression fracture.
40  The medical experts themselves were not cross-examined. On the face of the curriculum vitae's produced and the scope of the opinion required in this case, I find the speciality, qualifications and breadth of experience of Dr. Munk lend more weight to his opinion.
41  Mr. Chimich's opinion is weakened by the fact that he did not conduct an onsite investigation and take his own measurements as Dr. Cripton did. Dr. Cripton's opinion is weakened by the complex set of facts and conditions he must assume about how the plaintiff atypically fell down the Cottonwood stairs; but that complex scenario would be less problematical for his opinion if it were strongly supported by witness evidence, which does not appear to be the case, or supported by empirical evidence such as bruises, abrasions or other clear identifiers of significant injury to the plaintiff's back, likewise lacking.
42  While the opinions of Mr. Chimich and Dr. Cripton were of some assistance, this case will not turn on either opinion, though of the two, I prefer the opinion of Dr. Chimich for the reasons mentioned.
4 EVIDENTIARY RULINGS 
43  I turn now to certain evidentiary rulings relating to Rogers cell phone records and the Mission General Hospital emergency admission record in order to decide if I can rely on some of the information contained in them.
a. Cell Phone Records Authentication and Admissibility
44  The defendant objected to the admissibility of the Rogers' cell phone records on the grounds that Mr. De Fehr, a witness called by the plaintiff to explain certain technical aspects of the cell phone records that were produced by Rogers pursuant to court order, could not introduce the records into evidence or attest to their accuracy as a true copy of the original.
45  Mr. Buhler also argued that the records could be introduced only pursuant to s. 42 of the Evidence Act, 1996 R.S.B.C. c. 124, business records rule, which requires that the adducing party show that "they were kept in the usual and ordinary course of business to record in the document a statement of the fact at the time it occurred or within a reasonable time after." He argues that the plaintiff did not satisfy this requirement. Counsel also submitted that it was not clear whether the records were recorded in Pacific or Eastern Time, or corrected for daylight savings time.
46  I reject these submissions for the following reasons.
47  Of course a document must be authenticated before it can be admitted into evidence. Here, the cell phone records were received as documents produced by Rogers pursuant to a court order. The records were attached to a cover letter from a Rogers agent who explained that the records were produced in accordance with that order. The records therefore purport to set out every call made at stipulated phone numbers and time periods. Though not attached to a sworn affidavit, the signed letter provides some evidence confirming the authenticity of the records.
48  This letter and attached court ordered cell phone records were produced by plaintiff's counsel, who in his role as agent and as an officer of the court attests to the legitimacy of the letter and its attachments as delivered and received in response to the court order.
49  This form of authentication is far from ideal. However, there are other circumstances to consider, including the fact that during the trial defendant's counsel conceded that the records could be used for the limited purposes of showing that someone at one phone number called another at a certain time:
 Mr. Buhler:  But we dealt with that. It was an [sic] expert evidence as to what it meant that particular tower dealt with a phone call. All we agreed these records were going to show was that someone called someone at the numbers here at a particular time. [Page 12, Day 2 of Trial] 
50  As for the need for interpretation of these records by Rogers, these are not records that require expert interpretation. They are clearly labelled "calling number" and "called number". Further, pertinent sections of these records were put to the witnesses who admitted the cell phone numbers, and did not repudiate the calling time information in them. Generally speaking, they were acknowledged to be "probably" accurate. It should be noted as well that the witnesses could test the accuracy of the information in the records with copies of their own cell phone records if they had concerns about the accuracy of the information.
51  Further, the records require no interpretation if utilized for the limited purposes of showing the date and time the calls were made, and from what number and to what numbers and the duration of the calls. Cell phone bills are ubiquitous, and in them one commonly sees the date of a call, the number of the recipient, the duration of the call and the calculated charges, if any. And here, the records are not received to show the location of the caller at the time the calls were made, which was a major concern of counsel: I found Mr. De Fehr's evidence relating to this both irrelevant and unqualified. Also pertinent is the common knowledge that Rogers, like other cell phone companies, needs to keep a record of the time, duration and recipients of calls in order to justify their billings to customers. I conclude that the records here can be properly utilized to show when someone from one number called another based upon:
the fact that the records are generally corroborated by the testimony of witnesses;
the fact that the calling records of one number correspond to the receiving records of another with the numbers admitted by the relevant witnesses;
the statement of the defendant's counsel;
common knowledge and experience in reading cell phone records;
they were produced pursuant to court order and there is sufficient evidence of authenticity in the circumstances.
52  With regard to the remaining submissions of the defendant arguing against the admissibility of the cell phone records: It was not clear if all these objections related to the admissibility of the records generally or just to their admissibility for the purpose of showing the location of the caller, (which they cannot be used for in this case). These objections included an argument that without testimony from Rogers we cannot not be sure if the records were corrected for time zones and day light savings time. Not only do these arguments fail to persuade, they are relevant only when considering the weight of the evidence, or the interpretation of the evidence, not when considering their admissibility. Further, the times shown in the bills accords sufficiently with the oral testimony of witnesses about the local times of pertinent events.
53  I note that despite the above noted statement by counsel, he still argued against their admissibility on the grounds that they are admissible only under s. 42 of the Evidence Act, "whose requirements the plaintiff has not satisfied". That is not correct. These records can also be admitted as a principled exception to hearsay. As none of the parties seem able to remember with certainty the timing of the relevant calls made, (understandably) that are of importance in this case, the objective evidence provided by the phone records are necessary. As for reliability, the records were produced by a major disinterested corporation pursuant to a court order, and the plaintiff paid Rogers to produce them. As mentioned, it is common knowledge (and common sense) that Rogers must keep accurate call records for its own business needs. The records information was not rebutted by the defendant, despite more than adequate advance notice of their content and tender. Based upon these circumstances, to which can be added the lack of prejudice to the defendant, threshold reliability has been established and the evidence should be admitted for the purposes stated: see R. v. Hall, .
54  The above ruling should not be taken as an endorsement of a practice of adducing such records without at least a covering affidavit and imprinted record certification. However, in the circumstances of this case, and for the reasons given, I have admitted them for certain purposes.
b. Mission General Hospital Emergency Records
55  The defendant objected to the admissibility of the Mission Hospital emergency admission clinical record sheet. The relevant portions of this sheet are the type written entries in the top left corner of the page, one of them stating that the plaintiff fell from a trailer, just as the plaintiff claims. As noted earlier, Sikander Bath testified that he was present and gave information to the admitting clerk. The plaintiff submits that among the information he gave to the clerk was the location of the fall at the trailer. I should mention here that the attending physician's handwritten notes in the lower portion of the record also contained a note that the plaintiff fell from a trailer. This was redacted from the document after submissions by counsel, and by agreement. However, the said typewritten portion typed in by the clerk about the location of the fall was not redacted. This may have been due to oversight on the part of the defendant's counsel in the heat of trial. I would have considered this if so, but given my findings for other reasons, I need not consider that as a reason for also excluding this part of the unredacted section of the record.
56  Such a statement [about the location of the fall] would not be hearsay if submitted for the purposes of simply showing that the statement was made. If admitted as such, it could go to the credibility of Sikander Bath's testimonial loss of memory or any denial he offered about making the statement. However, while plaintiff's counsel questioned Sikander Bath generally about the making of statements to the admitting clerk, the statement itself and the note about the location of the fall was not squarely put to him.
57  This same concern about the failure to put the statement squarely to the witness arises when attempting to adduce this evidence for the truth of its contents. Though I disagree with counsel that this case is similar to Olynyk v. Yeo  (B.C.C.A.) and Johnny v. Palmantier, , it nevertheless would still be highly prejudicial to admit the evidence for this purpose without giving Sikander Bath an opportunity to explain the statement or to deny he was the author, especially considering his evidence that Mr. Gill was also present at the time. It is of course the rule in Browne v. Dunn (1893), 6 R. 67 (H.L.) that in such circumstances as these, stands in the way of admission of the statement about the location of the fall for either assessment of credibility or truth purposes. If the cross-examiner intends to impeach the credibility of a witness by means of extrinsic evidence, they must give that witness notice of their intention. See also for a fairly recent case: Aberdeen v. Langley (Township),  and s. 14 of the Evidence Act.
58  However, this record can be admitted to show the time the plaintiff was admitted to the hospital. For this purpose, the record would be a business record kept in the ordinary course of business and recorded by someone who was under a duty to do so. It could be admitted for this purpose under the business records exemption.
59  Defendant's counsel also raised a concern that there was no evidence that the emergency ward clock used for admission was calibrated to the clock used by Rogers to record the time cell phone calls are made. This is a matter of weight, not admissibility, and regarding weight, common sense suggests that both the hospital and Rogers record keeping would be concerned about accuracy; requiring proof of exact calibration is not reasonable in a trial such as this, especially considering the evidence as a whole before me: Hall at para. 63.
5 FURTHER FACTUAL ANALYSIS 
60  I heard a fair amount of evidence about alcohol consumption enroute to the wedding reception, at the wedding reception, and after. While of only tangential relevance in deciding the location of the fall, evidence of activities leading up to the alleged fall at the double wide becomes more pertinent when assessing the defence of contributory negligence. I turn now to those events in greater detail.
61  As noted, the three men drove the plaintiff's Hummer to the wedding reception. They stopped at a liquor store in Mission where they bought a forty ounce bottle of Wiser's Rye Whiskey and a flat of 12 to 18 beers. The plaintiff and Parmajit Gill drank some of this on the way to the Cloverdale wedding reception. They drank more in the parking lot of the reception before going into the hall. I find they also had some drinks from the free bar, and some outside in the Hummer as well. When they left, I doubt any of them would have passed a breathalyser test.
62  Jasbir Bath, her mother-in-law, the Bath's children and some other relatives travelled separately to the reception in their Cadillac Escalade.
63  The oral testimony suggests that they all left the reception at the same time. The men were planning on travelling up 176th to the freeway and heading off to Vancouver to party more. So far as can I tell from the evidence, this was nipped in the bud by the mother of one of the younger men who had been hoping to join in with the other older men. As noted earlier, there was a transfer of passengers between SUV's and the plaintiff, Sikander Bath, and Parmajit Gill were driven to the defendant's Townshipline farm as outlined earlier.
64  I heard estimates of 11:30 a.m., 11:45 a.m. and 11:50 a.m. as the time of arrival at the farm. Cell phone records that I will set out more fully shortly show that the transfer of passengers near the 176th freeway entrance occurred around 11:23 a.m., which was the (recorded) time that a cell phone call was made at the time of the vehicle and passenger change-over. Allowing 40 minutes to travel the distance to the Townshipline farm-just about all highway miles-will take the time to around midnight. Jasbir Bath then, either alone in the Hummer, or in the Escalade with the rest of the group, had about a 10 minute or so drive home.
65  The plaintiff testified that the plan was for the three men to go to the farm to continue drinking after their first idea to head into Vancouver was overturned. The plaintiff said when that did not work out, they mutually decided to go to the double wide located on the defendant's farm. But both Sikander Bath and Jasbir Bath testified that they had stopped off at the farm for no other reason than to drop off Parmajit Gill, and then go home. Sikander Bath said he just wanted to go home with his wife, but the plaintiff kept insisting. He said that he finally said, "What the hell" and decided to go along with it. I note that Jasbir Bath used the identical phrase, "what the hell," when describing this same conversation. This struck me as odd and not something one would remotely expect to be independently remembered by Mrs. Bath four years later, especially considering her affirmed testimony that she had never discussed this case with her husband.
66  I reject the evidence of Sikander Bath and Jasbir Bath about what occurred at the farm drop off. At question 63 of his examination for discovery, Sikander Bath testified:
 63 Q  The three of you got dropped off at the Townshipline property because you were going to continue to drink at the property? 
 A Yes. 
67  I also find it difficult to accept that Sikander Bath needed arm twisting to spend some time with his friends and have a few more drinks. Further, Parmajit Gill confirms the plaintiff's version.
68  The plaintiff testified that he did not know if the forty ounce bottle was gone by the time they arrived at the farm. Parmajit Gill confirmed he had whiskey in the double wide. In any event, there was certainly enough to pour drinks all round and, according to the plaintiff, enough for the final one poured for him in order to reduce the pain he was in after falling and breaking his leg.
69  From midnight until some time before 1:08 a.m., which was the time when Sikander Bath said he received the cell phone call from the plaintiff saying he wanted to go home because they were out of whiskey, the three men mostly hung around in the reception area at the south end of the double wide and drank.
70  The plaintiff says that Sikander Bath then invited him to look at the new pump house 'set up'. The new pump house was situated to the east of the double wide, about the distance of the length of the double wide three or four times over. The plaintiff testified that he told Mr. Bath he was not interested in looking at the pump house. In any event, Sikander Bath went outside the double wide on his own. The plaintiff says that Sikander Bath called out again for him to come and join him. (It was a balmy June evening and the windows on the east side of the trailer were likely open, so such a call should have been easy to hear.) This time, the plaintiff says that he decided to join him, but called out to Sikander Bath that he had to use the washroom first. He said that Mr. Bath then told him to come out the back door when he came out. (This would have been the back door that the plaintiff eventually fell from.)
71  At this point, Parmajit Gill was in the area of the front office. He gives a slightly different version. He says that the plaintiff was firing off the banger gun out the front door by the office sitting area where the three men had been drinking. But Sikander Bath, according to Parmajit Gill, was worried about the noise the plaintiff was making with the banger gun because there were tenants living on the permanent house located nearby; and so Sikander Bath told the plaintiff to go shoot the gun out the back door instead.
72  In either the plaintiff's or Parmajit Gill's scenario, the plaintiff then headed down the hallway. The plaintiff testified that he used the washroom, then turned right, heading again down the corridor for the back door, at the opposite end of the double wide from where the office area and front entrance was situated. The plaintiff, whether intending to shoot the banger gun, as Parmajit Gill testified, or to go from there and join Sikander Bath at the pump house, is at this point oblivious to the fact that there were no steps and no landing on the other side of the back door he was soon to open and step through. Neither Sikander Bath or Parmajit Gill said anything to the plaintiff about the fact there was no stairs or landing at the back door, though of course Sikander Bath in the first place denies telling the plaintiff to join him at the pump house, let alone come out the back door. Sikander Bath would not likely have yet reached the pump house at the time that the plaintiff would have fallen at the back door.
73  I find it unnecessary to find whether the plaintiff was going out the back door to join Sikander Bath as he says, or to shoot the banger from that location, which is what Parmajit Gill thought. If he had the banger in his right hand, this would have made it more difficult to open the door, but he could have held the banger in his left hand. The plaintiff was not cross-examined on this, presumably because counsel did not expect Mr. Gill to agree with the plaintiff's version at the time that he cross-examined the plaintiff.
6 FINDINGS ON LOCATION OF THE FALL 
74  I find that the plaintiff fell from the mobile home and injured himself at the farm on Townshipline. I firmly reject the evidence of all the defence witnesses who testified to the contrary.
.1 Cell Phone Records Support the Plaintiff's Version
75  The objective and circumstantial evidence supports the plaintiff's version of events. Sikander Bath called his wife at 1:12 a.m. She arrived at the farm just as he was making the second call to her at 1:24 a.m. This means that she arrived at the farm within 12 minutes. Sikander Bath would have no reason to call her back to ask "where are you?" if just awaiting her arrival to pick the men up and drive them home; 12 minutes is well within the expected travel time. However, this quick call back makes more sense if there were some sense of urgency, as there would be if the plaintiff had broken his leg and was in lot of pain.
76  Allowing 10 minutes for an urgent drive to the hospital, just down Mission Highway and across the Mission bridge, would place the plaintiff at Mission Hospital sometime around 1:35 a.m. The hospital records indicate registration at 1:37 a.m.
77  Sikander Bath indicated that they were not in a hurry to get home; the trip could take 15 to 20 minutes according to him. Allowing 15 minutes, three minutes more than the approximate time it took Mrs. Bath to drive over from Mission, would place them at home on Cottonwood at around 1:45 a.m., 12 minutes after the registration time at the hospital. To this, time needs to be added for getting out of the car, walking to the back of the house, climbing the stairs, falling, fetching a chair for the plaintiff to sit on, helping him around the side of the house, loading him into the SUV and driving to the hospital. Arrival time realistically could not be much earlier than 1:50 a.m. The table below, based on the times contained in the Rogers records and the factual assumptions noted, compares the two scenarios and confirms that a fall at Cottonwood does not fit with the time available to arrive at the hospital by 1:37 a.m.
78  Mr. Buhler went through a similar analytical exercise and came up with an elapsed time very close to these calculations. He argued that there could be errors in the emergency record admission times, and that time the difference between the two theories was not that great. However, this overlooks the fact that it would have taken a considerable amount of time for the plaintiff to walk down the side of the Cottonwood house to the SUV-assuming he was even capable of doing so. These assumptions are generous to the defendants' case.
.2 Credibility
79  As far as credibility is concerned, I found Sikander Bath when giving his testimony was evasive, contradictory, argumentative, quibbled over non-essentials and I did not find him to be a credible witness. For example, Sikander Bath testified at trial that when he was at the bottom of the stairs he had looked up and then saw the plaintiff for about 10 seconds, saw him twist his leg into the thing ('the thing' most likely referring to the space between the treads). He also said that the plaintiff broke his leg when he landed on the concrete pad at the bottom of the stairs. However, on examination for discovery, he testified:
Mr. Cope:
 366Q:  I am not talking about time. I am talking about what you saw. What did you - 
 A  Sir, what I am telling you is this is what I saw. The guy fell right in front of me and he landed on his leg and then that's it. 
 367Q Let's back up a bit. 
 A Okay, let's back it up. 
 368Q  You are staying there. You are watching two people walk to the top of the stairs, correct? 
 A Um-hum 
 369Q That's yes? 
 A I was probably watching or watching the sky. 
 370Q Well, it's night time? 
 A  Well, it don't matter. I don't have to watch people. 
 371Q  Now, you are there star-gazing; is that what you are telling me? 
 A  Maybe I don't have to watch people. You are forcing me to watch people. 
 372Q I am asking you whether you were. 
 A  I don't remember four years if I was watching, but all I know is he fell in front of me. 
[...]
 395Q  And describe how he landed on the sidewalk as you saw it? 
 A  On one of his leg. I don't even know which leg he did break, left or right. 
 396Q I am asking you what you saw. 
 A  I just saw he dropped on one side and he said - holding his legs he said he broke his leg. 
80  I find Sikander Bath's evidence that Mrs. Bath was called to pick the men up not much more than one half hour after being dropped off because they had run out of whiskey, and that he would call his wife back again just twelve minutes later to see what was keeping her, is not believable.
81  I also find that Mrs. Bath's evidence was not credible. She clearly was not happy to be testifying in this case. She ignored the terms of a Rule 28 examination order made November 7, 2007 by Master Keighley and her explanation for her failure to attend the January 16, 2008 substituted date was unconvincing. She denied discussing the case with anyone before testifying, while at the same time gave the impression of following a scripted version of events when the topic related to the supposed Cottonwood fall. I have little confidence in Mrs. Bath's evidence and reject completely her account of events on Cottonwood.
82  As mentioned, the defendant intended to call Parmajit Gill to testify, and I adjourned the trial in order to afford the defendant an opportunity to call him as a witness. However, to the defendant's surprise and mine, his testimony supported the plaintiff's version of events. I allowed counsel to cross-examine Mr. Gill, but he was unshaken. Mr. Gill, who testified through an interpreter, was shown a copy of an affidavit sworn January 8, 2008 in Mr. Buhler's office, with statements therein placing the location of the fall on Cottonwood. Mr. Gill testified that Sikander Bath acted as an interpreter at the time, did not explain the contents of the affidavit, and just told him to sign it. He said the statement in it that the plaintiff had fallen on Cottonwood did not come from him. Mr. Buhler in cross-examination asked Mr. Gill to agree that there were others present at the time, intimating they also spoke Punjabi, but Mr. Gill did not confirm this to be so. No witnesses were called in rebuttal. Mr. Buhler suggested to me in argument that Mr. Gill's English was better than he let on, but I note that he was called by the defence, who presumably arranged the interpreter. Mr. Buhler submitted that Mr. Gill knew what was going on and what he had been asked to sign, intimating others were present. Of course, counsel is placed in an impossible position in such circumstances. As stated in court, counsel did nothing wrong here: it is not always necessary or possible to cross and dot every preparatory "t" and "i" when gathering witness statements for a case such as this; usually statements are just signed off, not sworn, as here. However, Sikander Bath's rejected evidence, his authority over Mr. Gill and the failure to certify the translation through an official court interpreter taints the reliability of the out of court statement in this case; and I am more than reluctant in the circumstances to regard this as a prior inconsistent statement.
83  I note that Mr. Gill's evidence did not dovetail with the plaintiff's evidence in all particulars, for example his recollection that the plaintiff was going to the back of the double wide in order to shoot the banger gun differs. Similarly, he minimized Sikander Bath's involvement in the banger gun shooting. He also introduced elements to some of the events that only an eyewitness would recall, such as going outside the trailer and walking along the front of it, looking for the plaintiff because he had not heard the banger gun going off for a few minutes. His description of his conversation when he met up with Sikander Bath outside the double wide conveyed the richer sense and sequencing of an eye witness account. I note as well that Sikander Bath was the witness's boss and that he was friends with both the plaintiff and Sikander Bath. Nonetheless, I do accept his evidence with some caution, though a caution somewhat tempered in that it does conform largely with other accepted evidence.
84  The defendant also called Manjit Khangura, who has so far gone unmentioned in these reasons. The defendant called him as a supervisor at the farm, employed by the defendant. He was not at the reception nor an eyewitness to the plaintiff's fall. No mention on his direct was made of his close relationship over 10 years with Sikander Bath. On cross-examination, the plaintiff admitted he was co-accused with Sikander Bath in criminal proceedings relating to GST fraud. Questioning on this issue was allowed, not touching the issue of character or honesty, but as evidence of the at first unmentioned close association between the witness and Sikander Bath. He acknowledged that he had been told all the details of the party, the drinking, the fall down the Cottonwood stairs etc. offering details, as Mr. Cope pointed out, not as well recalled by Sikander Bath.
85  Mr. Khangura was called principally to show that when he was at work the early morning following the plaintiff's fall, he had noticed that the planks that had been used to board up the door (well before the plaintiff's fall) were still in their usual place. I find it highly improbable he would have taken any notice of a condition that had supposedly been in place for weeks and when the circumstances and timing of events warranted the witness no reason at all to pay attention to the condition of the door (especially while driving a tractor around 30 acres of berries or alternatively doing paper work in the double wide office).
86  Likewise unbelievable is his evidence that when the plaintiff attended on the farm a couple of months later and asked him to remove the planks (by that time nailed against the door to prevent access) in order for the plaintiff to take pictures of the door he had fallen through, the witness said that he did not know the reason for the plaintiff asking him to doing this. He just did it as requested. The plaintiff had testified that Sikander Bath was present at the time and authorized removal of the planks, though Sikander Bath denied this. I find it likely that Sikander Bath was present at the time and authorized the removal of the doors; but this is not a necessary finding to my rejection of Mr. Khangura's evidence here. It would strain common sense to the breaking point to accept either that Mr. Khangura would have demonstrated such a singular lack of curiosity about the reasons for removing the planks or that he would have done so without some authorization or explanation. I reject Manjit Khangura's evidence.
87  I find that the door was not boarded up the night that the plaintiff opened it and fell to the ground. It was boarded up after this incident and I find the witness evidence about seeing it boarded up the day following the fall a complete fabrication.
88  I have considered the evidence of Iqbal Gill. Nothing in his testimony alters to any extent my conclusion that the plaintiff fell from the double wide.
89  Defendant's counsel identified various contradictions and minor discrepancies in the plaintiff's evidence. I have considered them and counsel's able submissions, but none of them give me cause to alter my conclusions on the question of the location of the fall. The plaintiff's evidence on the weightier issues was not significantly shaken on cross-examination.
90  I find that that the plaintiff fell out of the back door of the double wide, which had no deadbolt, neither was it boarded up to prevent egress by anyone. The stairs and landing had been removed earlier for whatever reason of convenience or simply not yet put up. Neither Parmajit Gill or Sikander Gill, on the evidence before me, warned the plaintiff about the danger. No signs were posted in the unit.
91  I find that the plaintiff was an invited and welcome guest of Sikander Bath and Parmajit Gill at the material time.
7 LEGAL ISSUES 
92  Defendant's counsel argued that if I should find that the plaintiff fell on the defendant's farm, it met the requisite lower standard of care owed the plaintiff imposed by the Occupier Liability Act in these circumstances. Defendant's counsel argues that the plaintiff was engaged in a recreational activity on lands and premises that were used for agricultural purposes: see s. 3(3.2)(b) of the Occupier Liability Act, 1996 R.S.B.C. c. 337. He further argues that the defendant was a trespasser because he was on the premises uninvited by any authorized person without reasonable grounds for believing that either Sikander Bath or Parmajit Gill had authority to allow him on the lands and premises in the circumstances. I will deal with the 'recreational argument' first.
.1 Recreational Use and Occupier Liability
93  The Occupiers Liability Act, can potentially lower the duty of care placed on owners:
[...]
Despite subsection (1), an occupier has no duty of care to a person in respect of risks willingly assumed by that person other than a duty not to
create a danger with intent to do harm to the person or damage to the person's property, or
act with reckless disregard to the safety of the person or the integrity of the person's property.
94  This lower standard of care is applied only in limited circumstances. The sections relevant to this case are reproduced below:
A person who enters any of the categories of premises described in subsection (3.3) is deemed to have willingly assumed all risks and the occupier of those premises is subject only to the duty of care set out in subsection (3) if
the person who enters is trespassing, or
the entry is for the purpose of a recreational activity and
the occupier receives no payment or other consideration for the entry or activity of the person, other than a payment or other consideration from a government or government agency or a non-profit recreational club or association, and
the occupier is not providing the person with living accommodation on those premises.
The categories of premises referred to in subsection (3.2) are as follows:
premises that the occupier uses primarily for agricultural purposes;
[...]
95  The purpose of these sections was considered in Skopnik v. BC Rail Ltd., . In Skopnik, the court adopted the comments of the court in Hindley v. Waterfront Properties Corp.,  (at para. 19 and para. 22). In Hindley the court explained that the amendments to the Occupiers Liability Act, which include s. 3(3.2)(b), were made for the purpose of recognizing that a normal duty of care would be too onerous on rural owners, who cannot reasonably be expected to monitor all their land in order to ensure that it is reasonably safe.
96  The amendments were made in order to lower the standard of care owed to outdoor recreationalists such as recreational bicyclists and ATV riders. The court in Skopnik recounted:
As detailed in the reasons of Mr. Justice Bauman, section 3(3.3) was added to the Act in 1998 in response to calls for reform by outdoor recreationalists who were willing to assume the risk of hazards in return for being allowed greater access. This was commented upon by the Honourable C. McGregor when introducing the amendment for second reading:
In planning the route for the Trans Canada Trail, government and community groups encountered a longstanding issue in British Columbia. Fear of liability is causing landowners to restrict recreational access to their properties. In the context of the Trans Canada Trail, this means that private land owners are reluctant to allow recreational trail use of their land and that local communities are hesitant to assume full responsibility for managing local portions of the trail.
Amendments to the Occupiers Liability Act will help to resolve these problems by lowering the duty of care owed to non-paying recreationalists on recreational trails and certain classes of undeveloped lands. These amendments more equitably balance the duty of care between occupiers and the non-paying recreationalists ...
(British Columbia, Official Report of Debates of the Legislative Assembly (Hansard), Vol. 9, No. 16 (11 May 1998) at 7681)
97  The purpose of s. 3(3.2)(b) establishes that the intentions of the plaintiff in this case may have been "recreational" within an ordinary meaning of that word, but not within the meaning intended by the Occupiers Liability Act. The position of the plaintiff is not at all like that of an ATV driver riding on a large tract of agricultural land, and far more like that of a guest, with the analysis of the duty of care guided more by social host liability and obligations.
98  It is important to note that the recreational activity provision can apply both when a plaintiff is invited by the owner and when not invited. Its real significance lies in those circumstances where the landowner invites the plaintiff, for example, to snowmobile on a large tract of land-when, though invited, he is still owed no higher duty than that owed to a trespasser. On the other hand, if a plaintiff were uninvited, hence a trespasser, the inquiry need go no further, the plaintiff is likewise a trespasser, the occupier required only to meet the lower standard of care: see s. 3(3.3)(a).
99  To accept the defendant's rough hewn interpretation of this section would lead to seeing hosts living on a Chilliwack farm released from the standards that would be imposed on them if hosting their guests in a Coal Harbour condominium. It would make no difference at all if the Chilliwack farmhouse stairs the guests were invited to climb were as rotten as a year old pumpkin, so long as the host lived on land used for agricultural purposes. This cannot be the intended result of the legislation.
100  Both the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal in Skopnik found that s. 3.2 was drafted in response to organizations representing outdoor recreational users, explaining that their constituents would be willing to accept a lower standard of care for greater access to rural areas. As the legislation was drafted in response to this plea, one can only conclude that it was intended for the broad range of "recreational uses" covered by such organizations. Broad though this range might potentially be, attending at a location on the invitation of an owner cannot reasonably be considered the type of recreational activity intended by the section.
.2 Trespasser Argument
101  Mr. Buhler referred me to Skopnik, which for the purposes of this case simply affirms that at common law and likewise for the purposes of s. 3(3.2)(a) of the Occupiers Liability Act, a person is a trespasser if on lands and premises without permission. A person's honest belief that they are not trespassing is not a defence. The Trespass Act, 1996 R.S.B.C. c. 462, on the other hand, requires enclosures around premises or the posting of signs around them.
102  Counsel then argues that the owner of the farm was the corporate defendant and that permission to enter the property could come only from a duly authorized representative of the corporate defendant, and that the plaintiff's honest belief that he had permission to enter the farm does not matter.
103  He further pointed out that: at the examination for discovery the plaintiff could not identify the owner of the property, so could not know who had authority to allow him entry; that the actual owner did not invite him onto the property; that Parmajit Gill did not have authority to invite the plaintiff onto the farm; that Sikander Bath did not have the authority, and the plaintiff had no reasonable basis for believing that he had it, since he did not know the identity of the owner.
104  The first flaw in this argument is its failure to acknowledge the fact that the act is the Occupiers Liability Act, not the "Owners Liability Act", as well as the fact that there may be more than one occupier. The Occupiers Liability Act defines "occupier" as follows:
An "occupier" means a person who
is in physical possession of premises, or
has responsibility for, and control over, the condition of the premises, the activities conducted on those premises and the persons allowed to enter those premises,
and, for this Act, there may be on occupier of the same premises.
105  The plaintiff argued that the defendant is negligent, based upon the invitation and direction of Sikander Bath, who was authorized to do so by the corporate defendant, into a dangerous situation. Though not plead or specifically argued, this situation is one that is provided for by s. 6 of the Occupiers Liability Act.
If premises are occupied or used under a tenancy under which a landlord is responsible for the maintenance or repair of the premises, it is the duty of the landlord to show toward any person who, or whose property, may be on the premises the same care in respect of risks arising from failure on the landlord's part in carrying out the landlord's responsibility, as is required by this Act to be shown by an occupier of premises toward persons entering on or using the premises.
If premises are occupied under a subtenancy, subsection (1) applies to a landlord who is responsible for the maintenance or repair of the premises comprised in the subtenancy.
For the purposes of this section
a landlord is not in default of the landlord's duty under subsection (1) unless the default would be actionable at the suit of the occupier,
nothing relieves a landlord of a duty the landlord may have apart from this section, and
obligations imposed by an enactment in respect of a tenancy are deemed to be imposed by the tenancy.
This section applies to all tenancies.
106  A tenancy includes a statutory tenancy, an implied tenancy, and any contract conferring the right of occupation, and "landlord" must be construed accordingly: see s. 1 of the Occupiers Liability Act.
107  According to accepted evidence, Parmajit Gill lived in part of the double wide part of the time. He was authorized to do so by Sikander Bath, who was responsible for the day to day operation of the whole farm, and for all practical day to day purposes was in physical possession of it. Sukhminder Bath had very little involvement in the day to day operations, including rental of the permanent house on the farm, which was rented out to tenants by Sikander Bath. He also confirmed that his brother Sikander Bath made all the arrangements for removal of the double wide from its former site at a saw mill to the farm-indeed the move was carried out by Sikander Bath without any prior discussion or authorization. In fact, Sukhminder did not even know that the double wide was on the farm until after service of the writ of summons on him in August 2005, two years later. He did not know a building permit was required, and did not instruct his brother to make inquiries, leaving this up to Sikander Bath as "manager of the farm." He had very little social contact with his brother and had never visited his house. He was unaware of his social activities.
108  Given this evidence, Sukhminder Bath's evidence that he did not give permission to his brother to invite someone to the double wide to socialize rings hollow, given that he had so little physical involvement with the farm operations that he did not realize for two years there was even a double wide on the farm. While Sukhminder Bath may have had financial oversight, it is clear that he had ceded managerial control, and for all practical purposes, physical possession of the farm and physical operations on it almost entirely to Sikander Bath.
109  I reject the submission that in the circumstances Sikander Bath did not have authority to invite the plaintiff onto the farm for social purposes. The plaintiff was therefore not a trespasser and the defendant owes him the legislated standard of care owed an invitee; and nothing further is required of the plaintiff.
110  But in addition, and referring now back to s. 6 of the Occupiers Liability Act, I find that both Sikander Bath and Parmajit Bath may be considered as a tenant with a right of occupancy: in the case of Sikander Bath in his capacity of farm manager in physical possession of the farm, including the double wide, and Parmajit Gill in his capacity as an employee with a right of part-time residency in the double wide inherent to his status as an employee with those specific duties assigned him by Sikander Bath.
111  The defendant, as owner of the lands and premises and employer of Sikander Bath and Parmajit Gill is ultimately responsible for the repair and maintenance of the premises; and a duty of care is owed to its tenants.
112  The Occupiers Liability Act extends this duty to "any person" that "may be on the premises". This 'extension' of course must be read subject to the right of an occupier to show a lower standard of care to trespassers, else that provision would be nullified. Therefore, s. 6 of the Occupiers Liability Act extends the duty of care owed by a landlord to its tenant to any 'invitee' of those tenants.
113  In all events, in the circumstances of this case, I find that Sikander Bath had authority to invite the plaintiff into the double wide to socialize, as did Parmajit Gill, and that it would be reasonable on the part of the plaintiff to assume that Sikander Bath possessed this authority; and I find that the plaintiff was not a trespasser in the circumstances of this case. Further, I have found that the cooperate defendant failed in its duty to take the care that in all the circumstances of this case was reasonable to see that a person in the double wide would be reasonably safe using it. Such default and liability, as here, would be actionable by the occupiers Parmajit Gill and Sikander Bath, and by operation of s. 6 this liability extends to the plaintiff in this case.
114  I note that incidentally the fact that the negligence of the corporate defendant would involve the non misfeasance and misfeasance of employee Sikander Bath would not be a defence to the plaintiff's action. And were Sikander Bath to bring such an action himself, the defendant would have a ready and very strong answer to such action in contributory negligence. In any event, the requirements of s. 6(3)(a) need not be read in such a literal sense. Further, I note that Parmajit Gill, also a tenant of the defendant, could also bring such an action.
115  I note also that it was open to the defendant to join Sikander Bath as a Third Party in this action, alleging breach of authority, likewise for the plaintiff to join Sikander Bath and Parmajit Gill as occupiers, who might theoretically then have joined the defendant as an occupier and/or made claims as employees for indemnification. However, this case can be decided, as constituted here, within the four corners of the Act.
c. Liability on the Ordinary Standard of Care
116  The defendant submits that even on the ordinary standard of care, it escapes liability, referring me to Wilde v. Cambie Malone Corp.  and guiding principles for the establishment of liability as laid down by Martinson J.
the defendant's failure to act must be a breach of the defendant's positive duty to take reasonable care to ensure that the plaintiff was reasonably safe when using the premises;
the duty does not extend so far as to require removal of every possibility of danger, perfection is not required;
it must be proven that the unsafe condition actually caused the accident in question.
117  The above tests are well met in this case. Had the defendant taken the reasonable care exemplified by the municipal inspection standards, the plaintiff would not have fallen. Further, I reject the defendant's argument that the accident was not foreseeable on the basis that the premises were intended to be used during day light business hours only. This accident could have just as easily occurred in daylight business hours with a farm worker in for a noon hour lunch leaving in a hurry and distractedly rushing out the door and falling in the same way as the plaintiff. Further, it is trite law that the precise nature of the harm that has unfolded need not be foreseen; only the reasonable possibility of harm and in a general way. I find that the duty of care, and the standard of care, and the breach of it are all well proven on the evidence in this case.
d. Contributory Negligence
118  Occupiers are entitled to assume that persons using their premises will exercise reasonable care for their own safety: Fryer v. Beta Theta Pi Alumni Assoc. of British Columbia,  (S.C.).
119  It is clear from the evidence that the plaintiff consumed a great deal of alcohol throughout the day. While he testified that he was able to walk down the double wide hallway without difficulty, he also acknowledged that he was too intoxicated to drive a vehicle. Defendant's counsel referred me to the following cases where the plaintiff was found partially responsible for his injuries on account of intoxication:
Cretien v. Jensen ;
Cooper v. Spectra Food Corp, ;
Peters v. A.B.C. Boat Charters Ltd ;
Niblock v. Pacific National Exhibition .
120  The defendant submits as well that the plaintiff did not look before stepping out the trailer door and referred me to the following cases where a plaintiff was found at fault in varying degrees for failing to look where they were going:
Macrae v. Peterson, Stark and Fowler, ;
Pilon v. Joe Webber Pontiac Buick GMC Ltd., ;
Castillo v. Westfair Foods Ltd. (c.o.b. Real Canadian Superstore), .
121  In this case I note that the plaintiff was not warned off about the absent landing and stairs, a failure that would not be completely unexpected given the inebriated states and the depressed state of vigilance and care that usually follows. Further, as Mr. Cope pointed out for the plaintiff, the door opened outwards, and there was no light. I am not sure that this assists the plaintiff that much however; he knew he was going outside. Nonetheless the fact he was not warned off, and indeed was told to either exit that door-or shoot the banger from it on Parmajit Gill's version-are mitigating factors in apportioning blameworthiness on this aspect. All aside, just a modicum of care would have cautioned the plaintiff to check before stepping out into the darkness without any hesitation at all.
122  This is a question of relative blameworthiness. I find the plaintiff contributorily negligent. I apportion fault, with the defendant bearing 70%, the plaintiff bearing 30%.
N. BROWN J.
End of Document
Kahl v. Jakobsson, [2006] B.C.J. No. 1722
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vernon, British Columbia
Loo J.
Heard: March 14 - 17 and 20 - 24, 2006 (Kelowna)
and March 30 - 31 (Vancouver).
Judgment: July 28, 2006.
Vernon Registry No. S31377
[2006] B.C.J. No. 1722   |   2006 BCSC 1163   |   151 A.C.W.S. (3d) 741
Between Bob Kahl, plaintiff, and Ben Jakobsson, defendant
(137 paras.)
Case Summary
Tort law — Negligence — Causation — Contributory negligence — Action by the plaintiff for damages for injuries suffered in a snowmobiling accident allowed — The plaintiff claimed that he was struck by the defendant's snowmobile following an aborted jump — The defendant contended that the plaintiff's injuries were caused when he disembarked — The court found that statements by the defendant to witnesses and medical evidence established that the plaintiff's injuries were caused by the defendant's snowmobile — Contributory negligence was rejected because the accident was not reasonably foreseeable.
Damages — General damages — Categories of — Loss of income — For personal injuries — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Action by the plaintiff for damages for injuries suffered in a snowmobiling accident allowed — The plaintiff, age 49, sustained serious fractures to his leg and back, that caused ongoing pain, and prevented him from engaging in his normal recreation activities — He returned to work in a decreased capacity after two years — He was awarded damages of $785,400 comprised of general damages of $125,000, past income loss of $150,000, loss of earning capacity of $450,000, cost of future care of $50,000, and special damages of $10,400.
Action by the plaintiff, Kahl, against the defendant, Jakobsson, for damages for injuries suffered in a snowmobiling accident -- The parties were snowmobiling together when the plaintiff drove over an unmarked jump, lost control of his snowmobile, and jumped in the snow -- Seconds later, he saw the ski and cowling of the defendant's snowmobile coming toward him -- The plaintiff, age 49, sustained serious fractures to his leg and back, that caused ongoing pain, and prevented him from engaging in his normal recreation activities -- He returned to work in a decreased capacity after two years -- The defendant contended that the plaintiff's injuries were caused when the plaintiff disembarked after the aborted jump -- Several witnesses testified that the defendant commented about running over the plaintiff -- The defendant denied making such statements -- The defendant conceded that if he struck the plaintiff, he was negligent -- He raised the alternative argument that the plaintiff was contributorily negligent -- HELD: Action allowed -- The evidence of the defendant was evasive and inconsistent and was rejected where it conflicted with the evidence of the plaintiff -- Based on the testimony of the witnesses and medical findings, it was established that the defendant's snowmobile struck the plaintiff -- The plaintiff's injuries were caused by the impact -- The fracture pattern suffered by the plaintiff was more consistent with a high energy impact from a motorized device than jumping from a snowmobile and landing in snow -- The plaintiff was not contributorily negligent because there was no evidence that the jump was foreseeable -- The plaintiff was awarded damages of <damage type = "total">$785,400</damage> comprised of general damages of <damage type = "general">$125,000</damage>, past income loss of <damage type = "past wage loss">$150,000</damage>, loss of earning capacity of <damage type = "future wage loss">$450,000</damage>, cost of future care of <damage type = "future care">$50,000</damage>, and special damages of <damage type = "special">$10,400</damage>.
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: M.G. Temple, T.L. Napora
Counsel for the Defendant: H.C. Hayden, C.R. Thomson
LOO J.
Introduction
1  Bob Kahl and Ben Jakobsson used to be best friends. They were snowmobiling together when Mr. Kahl, who was in the lead, suddenly drove over an unmarked jump, lost control of his snowmobile and jumped into the snow. Seconds later, he saw the right ski and the cowling of Mr. Jakobsson's snowmobile coming towards him. Mr. Kahl sustained a serious compound left shin bone fracture, a burst fracture in his low back, and suffers ongoing pain.
2  When Mr. Kahl commenced this action against Mr. Jakobsson, their friendship came to an end.
3  Mr. Kahl claims that Mr. Jakobsson's snowmobile struck him. Mr. Jakobsson claims that the injuries were caused when Mr. Kahl's snowmobile bounced or when he jumped into the snow. However, witnesses testified that after the accident Mr. Jakobsson either told or indicated to them that he ran over Mr. Kahl. Mr. Jakobsson denies making any such statements and says that the witnesses are mistaken. Credibility is therefore in issue, as are liability and damages.
Background
4  Mr. Kahl is 49 years old. He has owned and ridden snowmobiles since the 1970's. Snowmobiles have a brake lever on the left handlebar and a throttle on the right handlebar. Depress the throttle: the snowmobile goes faster; depress the brake lever: the snowmobile slows down. The engine is contained in the engine cowl or the body of the snowmobile. The handle bars control the direction of the skis that extend out the front of the snowmobile. A rubber track 15 to 16 inches wide at the rear and underneath the snowmobile is for traction and braking. Lugs on the track dig into the snow and throw up a rooster tail of snow and ice crystals depending on the snowmobile's speed and the snow depth.
5  In early 2002, Mr. Kahl bought Mr. Jakobsson's 1997 Summit 583 Ski-doo when Mr. Jakobsson bought a new Summit 800 Ski-doo. The 583 had 100 horsepower but it was not as powerful as Mr. Jakobsson's 800 that weighed between 525 and 530 pounds, and at three-quarters throttle could travel at speeds up to 65 miles per hour.
6  Around noon on Saturday, March 2, 2002, the parties left Mr. Jakobsson's cabin at Lost Dog to go snowmobiling. It was a nice sunny day. They headed up a logging road leading into the hills around Kimberley. They took turns being in the lead, and followed one another by about 100 to 150 yards depending on their speed and the rooster tail.
7  After stopping for lunch the parties followed a deactivated logging road that generally ran in the centre of a clear cut area. The road was about one kilometre in length, straight, and generally flat. There was about two inches of fresh snow but it was generally hard packed. Underneath the "untracked" snow you could see the tracks of snowmobiles that had been there before. The tracked portion of the road was about fifteen feet wide. On both sides of the tracked portion there was approximately two feet of powder snow.
The Accident
8  The accident occurred about three-quarters of the way down the road.
9  Mr. Kahl was travelling around 30 to 35 miles per hour, when he suddenly went over a "jump" or what Mr. Jakobsson called a "launch pad". Mr. Kahl did not see the jump before he went over it because everything was white. The jump was about two to three feet high and took up most of the road. It appeared to have been built by other snowmobilers.
10  As he went over the jump Mr. Kahl applied his brakes, slowed down, and his Ski-doo bounced a couple of times. He started losing his grip on the handle bars and slipping off of the back of the Ski-doo. He jumped off to his right into two or three feet of powder snow. His right side and shoulder hit the snow and he began rolling to his left. The sensation of rolling in the snow reminded him of being a kid in a snow bank.
11  Mr. Kahl sat up and wiped the snow off his goggles. His knees were bent up, his feet were about 12 inches apart, and his boots were just on the edge of the trail. He felt no pain or discomfort.
12  He looked to his left and saw Mr. Jakobsson coming towards him "going pretty fast". He thought Mr. Jakobsson could see him because he wore a bright red helmet. He tried to get out of the way but could not get any traction in the powder snow.
13  Mr. Kahl said that he saw the right ski and the cowling of the 800 Ski-doo and then he was hit. Mr. Kahl claims that he was struck on the left side of his torso, spun to the right, and thrown face down and forward into the snow. He was in excruciating pain "everywhere", could not catch his breath, and thought he was going to die.
14  Mr. Kahl eventually sat up and found that his glasses and goggles were missing. He put snow on his forehead to prevent himself from passing out. He knew that he had to get back onto the snowmobile and go for help because an ambulance could not get to where they were. He saw that the tips and toes of his boots were flattened and turned to the right. He turned his left leg, but his boot did not move. His leg was broken.
15  Mr. Jakobsson is 53 years old and has been riding snowmobiles for close to 15 years. He did not see the jump until "it was pretty much right in front of me". He quickly stood up and accelerated so that the snowmobile's suspension would absorb as much shock from the unexpected jump as possible. In the process, he smacked both of his knees against the cowling. He saw Mr. Kahl sitting in the snow either just before he went over the jump or just as he was going over the jump. On his examination for discovery, he testified:
 Q  Okay. Now, as I understand it, you have described the accident scene as being on a section of trail that was straight for about one kilometre? 
 A At least. 
 Q More or less flat? 
 A Flat. 
 Q  And there was nothing to obscure your vision of the accident scene, in terms of -- 
 A No. 
...
 Q  So as I understand your statement, you're approaching the jump at, what was it, 40 to 50 miles an hour? 
 A Possibly, yes. 
 Q  You see Mr. Kahl on the other side of the jump, sitting in the snow, correct? 
 A Correct. 
...
 Q  I don't want to insult you, sir. I just want to know what you did. You did not -- 
 A I did not brake. 
 Q  You decided to, in the words given to Mr. Graw, "pin it", correct? 
 A Accelerate. 
 Q And so you gave it as much gas as you could? 
 A Exactly. 
 Q  How many horsepower does that machine have? I'm going to suggest about 130 horsepower. 
 A Yeah. 
...
 Q You didn't attempt to brake? 
 A No. 
 Q You gave it gas, correct? 
 A Correct. 
 Q As much as you could? 
 A You bet. 
...
 Q  The previous sentence in the statement says, and I'll quote it, "I don't believe my right ski ever went down". 
 A My right ski went down. 
16  Mr. Jakobsson became airborne going over the jump. He lost control of his snowmobile and fell off. His snowmobile landed about 20 feet past Mr. Kahl who was screaming that his leg was broken.
17  Mr. Jakobsson could not move Mr. Kahl's snowmobile close enough to him, so he backed his own snowmobile up and Mr. Kahl crawled on. They drove each other's snowmobile. It was a slow painful ride for Mr. Kahl but after about 30 minutes they recognized where they were when they saw the old Highways Department maintenance building along the highway that runs through Kimberley. They telephoned home and then waited for help to arrive.
18  Mr. Kahl was taken by ambulance to the hospital in Kimberley where he was initially treated, and then later that day to the hospital in Cranbrook. He had multiple bruises and abrasions across his face, the bridge of his nose, and his chest. He had tenderness on his left ribs and collarbone area. He complained of back pain.
19  Mr. Kahl sustained a compound fracture of his left tibia (shinbone) and fibula, which are the two bones between the knee and the ankle. Dr. Charles Buckley, the orthopaedic surgeon who treated Mr. Kahl in the emergency department at Cranbrook Hospital, found the leg wound to be approximately two centimetres or almost an inch long. The bone had broken into multiple parts or fragments. Some bones drove through the skin. Mr. Kahl also sustained a burst fracture of the L5 vertebra in his lower back.
Did Mr. Jakobsson's Snowmobile Strike Mr. Kahl?
20  The first issue is whether Mr. Jakobsson's snowmobile struck Mr. Kahl.
21  Mr. Kahl's wife and his son Cody were the first to arrive. Mrs. Kahl saw Mr, Jakobsson sitting on Mr. Kahl's snowmobile and Mr. Kahl slumped on Mr. Jakobsson's snowmobile. He looked very pale and was shaking. The snowmobiles were parked parallel to each other about 10 to 15 feet apart.
22  Mrs. Kahl got out of her car and walked towards Mr. Jakobsson because he was the closest. She asked him what happened, and said that he replied, "I'm sorry. I ran him over". Mr. Jakobsson says that he does not recall having a conversation with Mrs. Kahl and denies he made any such statement to her.
23  Mrs. Kahl states that Rosie Albitini, Mr. Jakobsson's wife, then arrived and waited on the highway with Cody for the ambulance to arrive.
24  Dennis Hunt is a paramedic who arrived in an ambulance shortly after 5:00 p.m. He saw five people at the scene, including Mr. Kahl who was sitting on a snowmobile trying to support his leg. When Mr. Hunt asked Mr. Kahl what happened, he replied that he fell off his machine and was run over by another machine.
25  Mr. Hunt said that others were within 10 to 15 feet of Mr. Kahl when he made that statement, and no one disagreed with the statement. Mr. Jakobsson says that he never heard Mr. Kahl say that he was run over by another machine or snowmobile.
26  Cody Kahl was 17 years old at the time of the accident. After his father had been taken away by the ambulance, he and Mr. Jakobsson took the snowmobiles down the road less than a kilometre away to Mr. Jakobsson's friend's place. Ms. Albitini then picked them up and drove them back to Mr. Jakobsson's cabin about 45 minutes away so that Cody could pick up his father's truck and drive it home.
27  Mr. Jakobsson drove Ms. Albitini's truck, while Ms. Albitini sat in the front seat, and Cody sat in the back seat. Cody said that he heard Mr. Jakobsson and Ms. Albitini discussing the accident in "a worried atmosphere". He recalls two sentences. At some point during their conversation Ms. Albitini asked Mr. Jakobsson how he felt, and he replied angrily to her, "What do you think? I just hit my best friend!" Cody said that he distinctly recalls that part of the conversation because Mr. Jakobsson "yelled" it out.
28  Mr. Jakobsson agrees that he and Cody drove the machines to his friend's place and then got into Ms. Albitini's truck, but he denies that he made any such statement.
29  Ms. Albitini says that she does not recall Cody being in her truck.
30  Dr. Charles Buckley, an orthopaedic surgeon, saw Mr. Kahl in the emergency ward in Cranbrook Hospital on March 2, 2002. Mr. Kahl told Dr. Buckley that after he had gone over a small jump he fell off his skidoo and was struck by the skidooer behind him.
31  Chris Weitzel ("Chris") is a millwright who works at the Tembec Pulp Mill where both Mr. Kahl and Mr. Jakobsson worked. He had two conversations with Mr. Jakobsson about the accident.
32  Mr. Jakobsson asked Chris to bring his tools from the heavy duty mechanic shop at the Mill to his shop at home. When Mr. Weitzel brought the tools to Mr. Jakobsson's, the subject of Mr. Kahl's accident came up. Chris testified that Mr. Jakobsson seemed remorseful and told him that he "felt bad about hitting him". He tried to comfort Mr. Jakobsson and told him "don't worry too much" and "accidents do happen".
33  Mr. Jakobsson denies that he made such a statement to Chris Weitzel.
34  The second conversation took place a couple of months later when Chris and Mr. Jakobsson met for several minutes at the front entrance of the Canadian Tire store in Cranbrook. Mr. Jakobsson's tone had changed from sounding remorseful and sympathetic towards Mr. Kahl, to being angry at Mr. Kahl. According to Chris, Mr. Jakobsson was fairly agitated and called Mr. Kahl "a fucking asshole" several times and said "yeah, I ran over him, but he didn't have to sue me!"
35  Mr. Jakobsson says that Chris is "mistaken" and "incorrect". He says that Chris was the first person he spoke to after learning from an insurance adjuster that he was being sued. In direct examination he said that Chris's only response was "you can't trust those insurance companies" and that Chris quickly changed the subject. In cross-examination Mr. Jakobsson said that he only asked Chris "what's the story behind Bob suing me?"
36  George Weitzel ("George"), a heavy equipment operator at the Tembec Pulp Mill, has known both parties for about 10 years. A couple of days after Mr. Kahl had been discharged from the hospital, George went to his house to help get his snowmobile track off the ground. Mr. Kahl was on the couch with his leg severely bandaged or in a cast. Mr. Jakobsson was also there.
37  George was curious about the accident. Mr. Kahl explained that he was lying on the trail trying to scramble out of the way because Ben was coming at him with his snowmobile and before he knew it, Ben hit him. Mr. Jakobsson told him that "when he came down the trail and first saw Bob" he "thought he was a fucking animal lying on the trail" and "ran over him" before he had a chance to react; he felt bad about it.
38  Mr. Jakobsson denies that he made such a statement to George Weitzel. He also claims that if he told George that he felt bad about the accident, it was because he felt sorry for Mr. Kahl.
39  Bob Eccleston works at the Tembec Pulp Mill as a labourer/heavy equipment operator and has known both parties for many years.
40  Mr. Eccleston testified that he was sitting in the Sullivan Pub in Kimberley when the two men walked in and sat down with him. Mr. Kahl was in a cast and Mr. Jakobsson had a sling on his arm from his rotator cuff surgery. Mr. Eccleston recalls the day because he had had a rotator cuff operation. Also, there had been a protest at City Hall that day in which Mr. Jakobsson had participated, and the three of them discussed the protest. Mr. Eccleston said that he started joking about sitting with two cripples and the two began talking about the accident. They talked about how Bob had gone over a jump, fell off, and Ben came up behind him and ran him over.
41  Mr. Eccleston said that Mr. Jakobsson appeared remorseful when he explained about going out with his friend, the accident, loading him onto the snowmobile and waiting for the ambulance. According to Mr. Eccleston, Mr. Jakobsson stated that "he ran him over and he felt terrible about running over a friend".
42  Mr. Jakobsson says that he hardly knows Mr. Eccleston and denies that he made any such statements to him.
43  Mrs. Kahl testified that Mr. Jakobsson made a similar comment during a turkey dinner. She said that Mr. Jakobsson and Ms. Albitini invited them to their house for a turkey dinner. Mrs. Kahl asked them if they would bring the turkey to the Kahl's house because Mr. Kahl was unable to move. Mrs. Kahl cooked the turkey at her house. The four of them were eating when the subject of the accident came up. According to Mrs. Kahl, Mr. Jakobsson said that he was sorry that he ran over her husband but he didn't see him.
44  Ms. Albitini learned about the accident when Mr. Jakobsson called and said that Bob had broken his leg and they needed an ambulance. She recalls nothing more about the telephone call. She denies Mr. Jakobsson giving her any explanation about how Mr. Kahl broke his leg, and denies asking him how it happened. She drove her truck to meet the men at the pullover on Highway 95A by the Highways Department maintenance office. She denies hearing any conversation about how the accident occurred when she arrived there. She does not recall Cody getting into her Dodge so that he could pick up his father's truck at their place in Lost Dog, and she cannot recall any conversation with Mr. Jakobsson in the Dodge shortly after the accident.
45  Ms. Albitini denies having a turkey dinner at the Kahls' house after the accident, and denies that the topic of the accident ever came up when the two couples met, except once when Mr. Kahl was laughing and made it sound like a big joke. The only discussion she says that she has had with Mr. Jakobsson about the accident was that he told her that "they had hit a manmade mound ramp type of thing and that's basically what he told me, and that Bob had broken his leg".
46  I do not find Ms. Albitini's evidence to be credible. She struck me as knowing more than she was willing to let on. A reasonable person who received a telephone call from her spouse saying that his best friend had broken his leg while they were snowmobiling together and requesting an ambulance would have asked "what happened?" if she had not already been told.
47  I find it highly implausible that Mr. Jakobsson would not have told her how the accident had happened either when he telephoned her, at the Highway pullout where they waited for the ambulance, or in the truck shortly after the accident.
48  Dwight LaFrenier has known Mr. Jakobsson for about 20 years because they live down the road from each other. Mr. LaFrenier became aware of the accident when Mr. Kahl came over to his house to help him set up his television receiver. Mr. LaFrenier saw Mr. Kahl on crutches and in "rough shape". His leg was about the size of two legs. It was "pretty gory looking". Mr. Kahl told Mr. LaFrenier that he and Ben had an accident.
49  About three weeks later, Mr LaFrenier was at Mr. Jakobsson's place having cocktails when Mr. Jakobsson said that his snowmobile had "run over Bob". Mr. LaFrenier responded, "you did a helluva job on him". Mr. Jakobsson replied in the affirmative, "yes, he was hurt bad".
50  Mr. Jakobsson denies that he made any such statements to Mr. LaFrenier. He claims that Mr. LaFrenier told him that "you two should get your stories straight", and his response was, "there is no story to get straight".
51  When Mr. Jakobsson was asked whether he made the statements that Sylvia Kahl, Dennis Hunt, Cody Kahl, Chris Weitzel, George Weitzel, Bob Eccleston, and Dwight LaFrenier testified that he had made, his response was, "no I did not". He says that they were mistaken about what they heard him say.
52  None of the witnesses were even slightly shaken on cross-examination. Indeed, all of the witnesses were firm in their conviction as to what Mr. Jakobsson told them about the accident.
53  Mr. Jakobsson argues that the witnesses were friends of Mr. Kahl and those who worked at Tembec were also members of the same union as Mr. Kahl. However, there is no doubt that the witnesses were also friends or acquaintances of Mr. Jakobsson who is also a member of the same union.
54  From the long pauses between the questions Mr. Jakobsson was asked in direct and cross-examination relating to the circumstances of the accident and his answers, I could not help but form the impression that Mr. Jakobsson carefully tried to tailor his answers so that it would appear his snowmobile was to the left side of the jump and where Mr. Kahl was in the snow. It is with regret that I find Mr. Jakobsson consistently attempted to deny any conduct, action, or statement that in any way suggested his snowmobile hit Mr. Kahl. His answers were evasive and inconsistent. Wherever Mr. Jakobsson's evidence conflicts with Mr. Kahl's, I prefer Mr. Kahl's evidence.
55  I therefore conclude, based on what Mr. Jakobsson told others and the medical findings, that Mr. Jakobsson's snowmobile struck Mr. Kahl. Mr. Jakobsson concedes that he was negligent if his snowmobile struck Mr. Kahl. He argues, however, that Mr. Kahl was contributorily negligent. He further argues that Mr. Kahl's burst fracture occurred when Mr. Kahl's snowmobile bounced, or when Mr. Kahl jumped off his own machine, not when his snowmobile struck him.
Was Mr. Kahl Contributorily Negligent?
56  Mr. Jakobsson argues that both parties are equally at fault by failing to exercise extreme caution and failing to travel at a slow enough speed to be able to see and avoid hitting obstructions like the jump. He points to the following extracts from the 2002 Ski-Doo Safety Handbook:
UNFAMILIAR TERRITORY
Whenever you enter an area that is new to you, drive with extreme caution. ...
...
UNSEEN OBSTRUCTION
There may be obstructions hidden beneath the snow. Driving off established trails and in the woods requires reduced speed and increased vigilance. Driving too fast in an area can make even minor obstacles very hazardous. Even hitting a small rock or stump could throw your snowmobile out of control and cause injury to its riders. Stay on established trails to reduce your exposure to hazards. Be safe, slow down and enjoy the scenery.
...
OBSTACLES AND JUMPING
Unplanned jumps of snowdrifts, snowplow ridges, culverts or indistinguishable objects can be dangerous. You can avoid them by wearing the proper colour lenses or face shields and by operating at a lower speed.
57  The parties may not have snowmobiled over the road before, but it was a long, flat, straight stretch of road that was used by snowmobilers. There is nothing in the evidence before me that the jump or obstacle was foreseeable in the eyes of a reasonably prudent snowmobiler. There is nothing in the evidence indicating what speed the parties ought to have operated at to avoid the accident.
58  If I am wrong, I find that a clear line can be drawn between the negligence of the parties. As Mr. Jakobsson approached the jump, he saw Mr. Kahl sitting about 20 feet past the jump. According to Mr. Jakobsson, about one and a half seconds passed between when he first saw Mr. Kahl sitting in the snow and when he reached the jump. He made no attempt to turn or avoid hitting Mr. Kahl. Instead, he "pinned" the accelerator and launched his machine off the jump. His right ski came down and the snowmobile struck Mr. Kahl.
59  I find therefore that Mr. Kahl was not contributorily negligent.
Did Mr. Jakobsson's Snowmobile Cause Mr. Kahl's Injuries?
60  Mr. Kahl was first taken to Kimberley Hospital, and then to Cranbrook Hospital where he was examined by Dr. Buckley, an orthopaedic surgeon. Mr. Kahl had multiple bruises and abrasions on his chest and face, including the bridge of his nose, tenderness around his left ribs and collarbone area, and complaints of back pain, or a "stiffening up" of his back. The most serious injury at the time was a compound fracture of his left tibia and fibula.
61  Dr. Buckley testified:
I spent a bit of time examining the soft tissues. And I noted that the muscle of his tibia, the muscles that basically control your foot and your ankles, there is a covering, sort of a second skin, that attaches to the bone and surrounds the muscle. Sort of acts like a glove to increase the strength of the muscle, its efficiency, and this had a significant rent in it, and we refer to that as a hernia, and it was quite large. And what that told me was not only did the bone break and go through the skin but the two pieces of bone scissored by each other. We refer to it as bayoneting and that actually is visible in the x-rays. But the deformity on the x-rays is static so at the time of the accident, the two pieces of bone slid significantly farther beyond each other than what is represented on the x-rays. And that was demonstrated by the hernia and the fascia and the shearing of the muscles that could be seen in the wound.
62  According to Dr. Buckley, the fracture pattern was more consistent with a high energy impact from a motorized device than with jumping from a snowmobile at 30 to 35 miles and hour and landing in a snowbank.
63  Dr. Allan Richardson, an orthopaedic surgeon, similarly opined that the fracture of the tibia is "a high velocity impact type injury".
64  The medical evidence is consistent with Mr. Kahl's evidence that he felt no pain or discomfort after jumping off his snowmobile and that he tried to crawl out of the way.
65  The vertebral body consists of three columns: anterior, middle, and posterior. A burst fracture is the fracture of two of the three columns. Mr. Kahl sustained a burst fracture of his lower lumbar vertebra involving the anterior and middle column. A piece of bone from the anterior column was retropulsed or pushed back into the spinal canal where various nerves are located. The L4 and L5 nerves that are immediately adjacent to the fractured bone affect the big toe, foot and ankle areas of the body.
66  The consensus of the plaintiff's experts and theory of the plaintiff's case is that Mr. Kahl's burst fracture was caused by a maximum forward flexion motion. The theory of the defence is that the burst fracture occurred when Mr. Kahl's snowmobile bounced a couple of times causing Mr. Kahl to land on his buttocks.
67  The experts agree that in order for a burst fracture to occur, there must be an axial compressive load and flexion. An axial compressive load is a vertical force acting from above or below. Flexion is a forward bending motion. The experts also appear to agree that without a videotape of the accident, it is difficult to determine the forces that were involved. What is important is not so much the direction of force on the body, but the energy and direction of force within the body.
68  Dr. Shaun Van Zyl is Mr. Kahl's family physician. Dr. Charles Buckley, Dr. Alan Richardson, and Dr. Richard Hu are orthopaedic surgeons who have either treated or seen Mr. Kahl. The consensus of these physicians is that the burst fracture was caused by a high velocity impact and an extreme forward flexion motion.
69  Generally, immediate pain is a hallmark of a spine fracture. I accept that Mr. Kahl felt no pain as he sat in the snow watching Mr. Jakobsson's snowmobile coming towards him.
70  According to Dr. Hu, who works primarily on traumatic injuries to the spine, and whose evidence I found very impressive, the axial compressive force that caused the burst fracture was "a lot" of forward bending that exceeded the normal physiology. The force had to be fairly significant in order to compress a bone fragment from the anterior column into the spinal canal.
71  Falls from a height onto one's buttocks or feet may cause a burst fracture, but the majority of spinal injuries from that mechanism of injury occur in the upper spinal column. Burst fractures in the lumbar spine are much less frequent because of the arch in the lower spine which acts as a kind of shock absorber.
72  Dennis Chimich is a senior biomechanical engineer with MEA Forensic Engineers & Scientists who testified for the defence. He concludes that the burst fracture injury likely occurred when Mr. Kahl went over the jump and the snowmobile hit the ground with such force that it bounced a second time.
73  However, the primary basis for Mr. Chimich's conclusion is five studies conducted on snowmobile accidents that occurred more than 30 years ago. Those accidents resulted in injuries higher up the spine rather than in the lumbar area. Snowmobiles are now designed with thicker seats and improved suspension, and the incidence compression fractures has been reduced. There are no reported studies of compression fractures to the lower vertebrae caused by snowmobile accidents.
74  Mr. Chimich's report did not address the compound fracture of Mr. Kahl's left tibia and fibula.
75  Dr. Joe Fairbanks, an orthopaedic surgeon, testified for the defence. His conclusion regarding the burst fracture is similar to Mr. Chimich's. Both Mr. Chimich and Dr. Fairbanks are also of the view that a forward flexion motion did not cause the burst fracture because there is no evidence that the facet joints were damaged.
76  The facet joints are at the back and on either side of the spine. There are two sets of facet joints for each vertebra. One pair faces upwards and the other pair faces downwards. The facet joints connect each vertebra to the ones directly above and below it. Viewed from the side, the facet joints look like a set of hinges that open and close in order to allow the spine to bend forward (flexion) and backward (extension).
77  The defence experts contend that if Mr. Kahl sustained the burst fracture from extreme flexion, the facet joints would have opened and been damaged, torn, or dislocated. Mr. Kahl's facet joints do not appear to have been damaged.
78  On this point I accept Dr. Hu's evidence that the facet joints are not readily seen either visually or even on X-rays or CAT scans. The ability to identify damage to facet joints on current medical imaging, is, at best, modest.
79  In my view, the weakness of the defence theory is that it considers the burst fracture in isolation and fails to explain the open wound and the bayoneting of the shinbone fragments. Dr. Fairbanks reported that the compound fracture indicated direct contact with a foreign object. Yet in testimony, even though he agreed that both injuries were caused by a similar mechanism of high impact contact, he did not agree they occurred at the same time. I do not accept his conclusion. Nor do I accept the argument that Mr. Kahl was run over by his own machine. That would be highly unlikely since he jumped off the rear of his snowmobile and to the side as it travelled forwards.
80  I conclude that the burst fracture were caused by Mr. Jakobsson's snowmobile striking Mr. Kahl.
The Injuries Sustained By Mr. Kahl
81  After the accident Mr. Kahl underwent open reduction and internal fixation of his lower leg fractures; a metal plate and eight screws were fixed to his left tibia. He remained in the hospital for five days.
82  For more than two months he had to sleep sitting up with his leg elevated on a pillow. He had difficulty sleeping because of his sore ribs, low back, and left leg. His cast was removed after about seven weeks. However, his leg and foot remained swollen and he had to wear open-toed shoes until November 2002.
83  In December 2003, Mr. Kahl had surgery to remove the hardware in his leg because it caused him severe pain.
84  The burst fracture and bony protrusion into the spinal canal has resulted in spinal stenosis (a narrowing of the space in the canal). This affects the nerves and flow of blood in the low back area. Mr. Kahl suffers constant low back pain that radiates through his left buttock into his leg, cramps, numbness in his left thigh, numbness in both feet, and the occasional burning sensation in his right foot. The spinal stenosis is worsening and Mr. Kahl's pain symptoms and ability to function are also worsening.
85  The pain worsens with walking, bending, lifting, or crouching, especially on hard surfaces, or sitting or standing for any length of time. The pain prevents him from sleeping through the night. Mr. Kahl cannot sit for longer than 30 minutes, walk slowly for more than 45 minutes, bend, stoop, crouch, or lift anything, without aggravating his pain symptoms. He has persistently tried physiotherapy, working out at the gym under the supervision of a kinesiologist, and a regular exercise program at home. He has done everything he can to improve his symptoms. Dr. Hu and Dr. Richardson recommend that Mr. Kahl undergo a further MRI scan because his increasing leg and nerve dysfunction suggest continued pressure on the nerves in his low back area. Depending on the results of the MRI he may require surgery, but he will likely continue to have pain even with surgery. According to Dr. Shawn McCann, Mr. Kahl's best case scenario is to avoid surgery by staying physically fit as best he can.
Mr. Kahl's Recreational Activities
86  Mr. Kahl was born and raised in Kimberley. In 1995 he married Sylvia Kahl. They have no children, but Mr. Kahl has two sons from a previous marriage.
87  Mr. Kahl was the consummate outdoorsman. He is an avid hunter and began hunting when he was seven years old. As he grew older he began to "range" and hunt sheep, moose, elk, and deer. He took hunting trips to Toad River near Fort Nelson and Blue River near Kamloops where he would hike strenuously for many hours for several days. He once shot a 700-pound bull moose that he and his friend dragged to the highway.
88  To get into shape for the hunting season, after work and during the weekends from May to October he regularly walked to the top of Mount Kimberley ski hill at least 60 times. It took him about 35 minutes.
89  He carried up to 70 pounds hiking and camping. He went jogging. He fished in creeks, rivers, and lakes. He has a 12-foot aluminium boat he used for fishing. He went cross-country skiing, snowshoeing, and riding on his all-terrain vehicle.
90  Mr. Kahl's former recreational activities are a thing of the past.
91  He can now only hunt from his truck on the backroads and on flat ground. He tried climbing Mount Kimberley but it caused so much pain in his back and legs that he had to quit. He tried snowshoeing in his five acre backyard but had to quit. He tried snowmobiling in his backyard but he has developed a phobia of people coming up behind him in vehicles and the snowmobile was too painful for his back. He sold his snowmobile. He can no longer enjoy the thrill of exploring in an all-terrain vehicle.
92  He can go for a slow walk with his wife along roads to and from their house, but he has to use poles and at the end of the walk he is in more discomfort than he was at the beginning. It is about as close as he can get to what used to be hiking in the wilderness. He can not hike into the hills, ridges, and mountains around Kimberley.
93  He can no longer cross-country ski. He sold his Nordic Track that he used to get into shape for cross-country skiing. He cannot use his boat to go fishing because he cannot load and unload the boat onto the trailer. He cannot even bend over to do up his shoelaces. His wife ties up his shoelaces.
94  He has a difficult time backing up when he is driving because he cannot turn his head around. Before the accident he purchased a "quad" so that he could attach a shovel to it and plough the snow in the winter. Because he cannot turn his head in order to back up, he now stands up with his knee on the banana seat so that he faces backwards when the quad is in reverse. However, he cannot plough the snow because he is no longer able to attach the shovel to the quad.
Mr. Kahl's Work Activities
95  In high school Mr. Kahl worked part-time as a helper/labourer at the Crestbrook Pulp Mill. In 1979 he obtained his DPW 2 welding ticket and began work at Cominco until October 1995 when he returned to work at Crestbrook, which is now known as Tembec. By all accounts he was a highly skilled and respected welder.
96  Based on his doctors' recommendations and a functional capacity evaluation Mr. Kahl began a gradual return to work in August 2004, more than two years after the accident. His welding tickets had lapsed so that he had to re-qualify by attending welding school from May to July 2004.
97  His regular shift was ten hours a day, four days a week from Tuesday to Friday. He returned to work four hours a day with light duties. In January 2005 he increased to six hours a day, but had to give that up at the end of February 2005 because of increased pain in his low back, both legs and feet. Dr. Van Zyl recommended he return to working four hours a day, but Mr. Kahl insisted on trying five hours a day.
98  Mr. Kahl has been working five hours a day since March 2005 and his condition is getting worse. He has continued to work when others in his position would have given up long ago.
99  Functional testing demonstrates that Mr. Kahl can no longer perform the physically demanding work of a welder. The work demands include crawling, climbing, kneeling or crouching, bending, lifting, overhead reaching, and working in awkward positions and confined spaces.
100  Mr. Kahl can no longer crawl, climb, kneel, crouch, lift weights greater than 30 to 40 pounds from floor to waist level, work in awkward positions, sit for more than 30 minutes, or stand for any length of time. Standing on the hard surface at work aggravates his pain symptoms. Sitting and walking aggravates the numbness.
101  Tembec has accommodated Mr. Kahl's disability by giving him light duties in the shop, providing a scissor-lift table, and a sit-stand chair. The light duties consist of making little brackets from two pieces of flat steel bar. He has made hundreds of them. It is menial work. Even so, he needs help from others lifting the steel bar. He has had to learn how to weld while sitting in a chair. It is not something he had to do before the accident. He was once proud of his work, but now feels he is "in a bubble looking out". He no longer feels he is part of the crew, but just "the guy in the shop doing the jobs nobody wants". He now works 20 hours a week even though under the terms of the collective agreement there is no provision for a part-time welder.
102  Tembec employees can ride a co-op shuttle bus between Kimberley and the pulp mill in Skookumchuk at a cost of <damage type = "other">$60</damage> a month. Because Mr. Kahl works a short work day, he has to drive himself approximately 77 kilometres to and from work. Sitting in the car for the length of the drive aggravates his back pain.
103  Mr. Kahl takes days off work because of the pain. At least once a week he attends the first aid room and lies down with heat packs. He is in great discomfort at the end of a work day. When he returns home he must lie down for at least an hour. The level of pain increases towards the end of the week. The more he does, the worse his pain. He is never without pain. He takes 400 mg Ibuprofen tablets three to six times a day.
104  Because of his forced reduced work week, Mr. Kahl's entitlement to weekly indemnity and long-term disability has been likewise reduced.
105  The defence does not take issue with the opinion of Dr. Shawn McCann, a physical medicine and rehabilitation specialist: Mr. Kahl will never be able to return to his former position as a welder and he will have pain for the rest of his life.
106  Needless to say, he is depressed as a result of the chronic pain.
107  I conclude that there is a real possibility that Mr. Kahl will not be able to continue working in his current job. I also conclude that before the accident, Mr. Kahl planned to work at Tembec until he was 65 years old.
Damages
General Damages
108  In his written argument, counsel for Mr. Kahl contends that as a trier of fact, this court should put itself in the position of a jury and disabuse itself of "all knowledge of the cap and specific details of catastrophic injuries suffered in the trilogy cases".
109  I cannot agree. This Court remains bound by the trilogy and the rough upper limit is to be applied as a rule of law: Lee v. Dawson, ,  at paras. 18 to 20 and 90.
110  Mr. Kahl seeks general damages in the range of <damage type = "other">$160,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$200,000</damage>. For Mr. Jakobbson, it is argued that it should be in the range of <damage type = "other">$80,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$100,000</damage>.
111  Counsel for the defendant referred to a number of cases dealing with fractures of the vertebrae; however what I consider significant is that Mr. Kahl will suffer pain for the rest of his life. I consider an award of general damages of <damage type = "general">$125,000</damage> to be appropriate.
Past Income Loss
112  Past income loss is agreed at <damage type = "past wage loss">$150,000</damage>.
Loss of Earning Capacity
113  In Kwei v. Boisclair  (C.A.) at 399-400, the Court endorsed the oft-quoted passage of Mr. Justice Finch, as he then was, describing some of the factors to be considered in assessing damages under this head:
The plaintiff has been rendered less capable overall from earning income from all types of employment;
The plaintiff is less marketable or attractive as an employee to potential employers;
The plaintiff has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities which might otherwise have been open to him, had he not been injured; and
The plaintiff is less valuable to himself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market.
(Brown v. Golaiy ,  (S.C.) at para. 8.)
114  The defendant concedes that Mr. Kahl's prognosis is guarded and he has a "meritorious claim under this heading".
115  Dr. Walter Hartzell, a specialist in occupational health, opines that Mr. Kahl has a profound permanent functional impairment as a result of the chronic pain in his left lower leg and ankle condition that limits him to essentially sedentary work. His functional capacity cannot be substantially improved by further physical rehabilitation. The prognosis for further impairment due to his progressive degenerative spinal condition is significant, as will be the costs of future care.
116  Dr. Hartzell recommends that a kinesiologist supervise Mr. Kahl's exercise program and that he be assessed by a multi-disciplinary pain management team to learn how to manage his pain symptoms. Dr. Hartzell also recommends vocational assessment and assistance. The cost is between <damage type = "other">$750</damage> and <damage type = "other">$1,000</damage>.
117  Dr. Gordon Wallace, a registered Rehabilitation Professional, opines that Mr. Kahl's range of occupational options is extremely limited. Vocational Test Battery results disclose that Mr. Kahl is intelligent, with good academic skills, and a strong potential to learn new labour market skills. Dr. Wallace also recommends vocational counselling to identify occupations that could accommodate Mr. Kahl's residual physical abilities.
118  There is no doubt that Mr. Kahl would prefer to continue working at Tembec as long as he is able to do so. If his symptoms are such that he cannot continue working at Tembec, he is faced with two alternatives: working at low-skilled and low-paying positions (e.g., as a self-service gas bar attendant or car rental clerk); or taking an academic upgrading program followed by a formal training program.
119  Dr. Wallace gave examples of available training programs ranging from ten months to two years in fields such as industrial automation and electronic technician. The costs range from <damage type = "other">$4,250</damage> to <damage type = "other">$8,000</damage> at B.C.I.T. in Burnaby, Vancouver Community College, and Thompson Rivers University in Kamloops. Dr. Wallace recommends an ergonomic assessment because Mr. Kahl will have to be accommodated so that he could alternately sit and stand throughout the day not only during the course, but in any future occupation. Even then, if Mr. Kahl should eventually qualify for another occupation, his ability to work full-time will depend on his ability to deal with his pain.
120  At present, Mr. Kahl does not have the financial resources to move to Vancouver or elsewhere in order to pursue the necessary qualifications for an alternate career. Even if he were able to do so, he would be in his early 50's by the time he completed his qualifications. An older disabled worker returning to the work force is doubly disadvantaged by the preference for younger, non-disabled employees, assuming similar qualifications.
121  Ms. Jutta Heinrichs, an economist with Associated Economic Consultants Ltd., prepared two reports for Mr. Kahl on the issue of loss of earning capacity. She presented three scenarios. First, assuming Mr. Kahl continues with his present work schedule at Tembec to age 65, his estimated loss of future earnings, assessed at <damage type = "other">$30,365</damage> a year plus non-wage benefits, is <damage type = "other">$420,598</damage>. Assuming that Mr. Kahl is forced to leave Tembec, and does not retrain but continues to work six hours a day, five days a week at a low-paying job with annual earnings of around <damage type = "other">$17,200</damage>, his estimated loss of future earnings and non-wage benefits is <damage type = "other">$675,663</damage>. Finally, assuming Mr. Kahl leaves the work force to retrain as an electronic technician or similar occupation, working eight hours a day, earning a starting salary of <damage type = "other">$29,536</damage>, increasing to $37,440 for five years, and thereafter to <damage type = "other">$44,720</damage>, his loss of future earnings and non-wage benefits is <damage type = "other">$501,004</damage>.
122  Mr. Darren Benning of PETA Consultants Ltd. prepared a report for the defence in response. One of his criticisms is that only non-statutory, non-wage benefits should be considered; and therefore a factor of 7.5% of wages, rather than 15.5 % should be used. However, the defendant wisely contends that the variation in the total calculations is relatively modest in the scheme of things, and little useful purpose is served by analyzing the variations. For example, assuming Mr. Kahl continues to work half-time to age 65, Ms. Heinrichs calculates a loss of approximately <damage type = "other">$420,000</damage>, while Mr. Benning's calculation works out to <damage type = "other">$325,000</damage>.
123  The plaintiff claims <damage type = "other">$700,000</damage> for loss of future earning capacity and non-wage benefits, less alternate employment earnings.
124  The defendant argues that the average age for retirement, currently 61.5 years, should be used, and damages in the range of <damage type = "other">$150,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$200,000</damage> is appropriate.
125  An assessment of damages, particularly loss of earning capacity which is a capital asset, is not an exercise of mathematical precision. An award for loss of earning capacity is not based solely on an economic analysis, although the analysis may be used as a guide: see Erickson-Louie v. Berland, ,  at para. 20.
126  As I have indicated earlier, I find that Mr. Kahl had no plans for early retirement. I accept Mrs. Kahl's evidence that she and her husband never discussed the prospect of early retirement. They had a mortgage that still had to be paid off, they enjoyed working, and they both have a strong work ethic.
127  Given Mr. Kahl's functional impairment and the real possibility that it will deteriorate and he cannot continue working at his current level, I consider an award of <damage type = "future wage loss">$450,000</damage> appropriate.
Cost of Future Care
128  Mr. Kahl claims <damage type = "other">$35,000</damage> for cost of future care based on: (a) loss of household services and handyman capacity including household chores, cutting the grass, removing the snow, and other work he used to do in and around the house, but can no longer do; (b) fitness fees of $900 a year; and (c) cost of care associated with further treatments and surgery at <damage type = "other">$2,000</damage> a year. He claims a further <damage type = "other">$35,000</damage> based on: (d) the <damage type = "other">$5,623.04</damage> annual difference between the cost of driving his vehicle and the cost of taking the shuttle bus to and from Tembec, to the age of 65; and (e) medication at a cost of <damage type = "other">$233.60</damage> a year.
129  The defendant submits that an appropriate assessment would be in the range of <damage type = "other">$20,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$25,000</damage>. The defendant properly contends that surgery and most of the treatments will be covered by third parties.
130  Mr. Kahl has to travel for some of his medical treatments, such as his last MRI which took place in Idaho; he used to share the housework with his wife; he will have to hire others to carry out work he used to do himself; there is a real possibility he will undergo a vocational assessment and perhaps retraining; and he requires intensive treatment or therapy to learn how to deal with or manage his pain. He can no longer reasonably take the shuttle bus to work, but there is a real likelihood he cannot continue working at Tembec to age 65.
131  I consider an award of <damage type = "future care">$50,000</damage> for cost of future care appropriate.
Special Damages
132  Mr. Kahl seeks special damages totalling <damage type = "other">$10,403.22</damage> for medication totalling <damage type = "other">$991.54</damage> and the balance for mileage at <damage type = "other">$0.40</damage> per km. The mileage includes travelling to welding school in Cranbrook, travelling to the pulp mill because Mr. Kahl can no longer take the shuttle bus because of the hours he works, and travel to various medical appointments.
133  The defendant's only argument is that the rate of <damage type = "other">$0.30</damage> should apply because that is the amount allowed under Schedule 3, Appendix C of the Rule of Court and it would be useful if there was certainty and uniformity on mileage claims.
134  Special damages are out-of-pocket expenses incurred as a result of the defendant's negligence. Seldom is the plaintiff questioned in detail on his or her mileage claim. That is likely because the plaintiff will have difficulty answering questions such as the miles or kilometres per gallon he or she gets from a vehicle, the cost of fuel on any particular day, and the amount of wear and tear. Mileage is generally treated more in the way of an allowance.
135  In 1990, Schedule 3 to Appendix C provided that travelling expenses for witnesses were not to exceed <damage type = "other">$0.20</damage> a mile. That was changed in 1991 to <damage type = "other">$0.30</damage> and the distance changed to kilometres. The rate has not changed in 15 years and on that basis alone likely does not reflect a witnesses' actual out-of-pocket expenses. On that basis I consider the mileage claim reasonable and award <damage type = "special">$10,403.22</damage> under this head of damages.
136  In summary, the plaintiff is awarded damages totalling <damage type = "total">$785,403.22</damage> as follows:
 (a) General Damages <damage type = "general">$125,000.00</damage> 
 (b) Past Income Loss <damage type = "past wage loss">150,000.00</damage> 
 (c) Loss of Earning Capacity <damage type = "future wage loss">450,000.00</damage> 
 (d) Cost of Future Care <damage type = "future care">50,000.00</damage> 
 (e) Special Damages <damage type = "special">10,403.22</damage> 
 Total: <damage type = "total">$785.403.22</damage> 
Costs
137  The parties made no submissions with respect to costs. If they cannot agree, they may make submissions.
LOO J.
End of Document
Mainardi v. Shannon, [2005] B.C.J. No. 1033
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
Preston J.
Heard: April 18 and 19, 2005.
Judgment: May 2, 2005.
Vancouver Registry No. S042578
[2005] B.C.J. No. 1033   |   2005 BCSC 644   |   138 A.C.W.S. (3d) 1204
Between Emilia Mainardi, plaintiff, and Andrew Shannon, defendant
(28 paras.)
Case Summary
Tort law — Occupiers' liability — Duty of occupier — To invitees.
Action by the plaintiff, Mainardi, against the defendant, Shannon, for damages sustained as a result of a slip and fall accident on the property of Shannon. Damages were agreed to at $50,000, but Shannon disputed his liability. Mainardi was a 76-year-old self-employed business woman who was delivering presents to the children at the Shannon household when she slipped on the front stairs. Though she had negotiated her way to the door, on her way back she had noticed the wet and icy conditions on the stairs and fell down a number of stairs to a brick landing, sustaining multiple injuries. She was wearing flat heeled shoes. Mainardi's granddaughter and friend who later attended the scene observed the stairs were not really icy, but definitely frosty or glazed. All three reported that the handrail was too wide to grip with the hands. Shannon's contractor testified to having painted the wooden stairs four years previously with a non-skid surface. The weather had been rainy, then below freezing. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 Mainardi was entitled to $50,000 in damages and costs. There was nothing dangerous or unsuitable about Mainardi's footwear. The witnesses' evidence of the condition of the stairs was consistent with the weather reports. The photos shown in court did not show stair treads or visible indications of a non-skid finish, but rather a worn painted surface and a railing that was very wide. The court was satisfied that the stairs were treacherously slippery and it was the slippery condition of the stairway that caused the fall. Shannon knew or ought to have known of the worn condition and absence of effective non-skid finish. Mainardi was aware of the slippery condition of the stairway, as she had testified that she considered asking to go through the house to use the back door. However, that did not constitute contributory negligence.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Occupiers Liability Act, (1), s. 3(2)
Occupiers Liability Act, R.S.O. 1980, c. 315
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: M.D. Murphy
Counsel for the Defendant: K. Fast
PRESTON J.
NATURE OF THE PROCEEDINGS
1  The plaintiff, Amelia Mainardi brings this action seeking damages for injuries sustained from a slip and fall accident which she alleges was caused by the negligence of the defendant, Dr. Shannon. She relies on the provisions of the Occupiers Liability Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 337 (the "Act"). On December 23, 2002, Mrs. Mainardi, slipped and fell when descending the stairs at Dr. Shannon's residence. She was 76 years of age at the time of her fall. She suffered multiple injuries. Mrs. Mainardi is a self employed businesswoman who has for many years operated a travel agency on Commercial Drive in Vancouver. The parties agree that the appropriate award of damages to compensate her for her injuries is <damage type = "total">$50,000</damage>. The only issue at trial was the extent of Dr. Shannon's liability, if any.
BACKGROUND
2  Mrs. Mainardi's daughter, Nicolette, was a close personal friend of Dr. Shannon's late wife. Nicolette Mainardi had given her mother some Christmas presents for the Shannon children and asked her to deliver them to Dr. Shannon's residence. Mrs. Mainardi had driven past the home on more than one occasion to accomplish the delivery but no one was home. On December 23, 2002 at approximately 9:30 a.m., Mrs. Mainardi was on her way to work at her travel agency. She drove past Dr. Shannon's residence which is approximately one block away from her business. She noticed that the van which the children's nanny used to transport the Shannon children was parked at the residence and decided to deliver the presents. She parked in an alleyway alongside the Shannon residence and, although there is a back door near the area where she parked, she elected, because of the time of day, to walk around to the front of the residence and climb the steps to the front door.
3  At the front of the residence there are 4 brick steps leading up to a brick landing and from there a further 10 wooden steps leading up to the porch where the front door to the residence is situated. The handrail on either side of the wooden steps consists of a 2" x 6" wooden board supported on wooden uprights approximately 10 inches apart. The precise dimensions of the wooden board capping the uprights are 1-1/2 inches by 5-1/2 inches. Mrs. Mainardi testified that she was unable to grasp the handrail because of its width. Accordingly, she used the wooden uprights for support, clutching them in turn with her right hand as she proceeded slowly up the stairs with the Christmas presents in her left hand. She successfully negotiated the stairs and did not recall seeing anything about the condition of the stairs on the way up that concerned her.
4  She rang the doorbell and a woman, whom she thinks was the children's nanny, came to the door. Mrs. Mainardi explained the nature of her errand and gave the Christmas presents to the nanny who took them and closed the door. Mrs. Mainardi then turned to leave and noticed that the stairs looked damp. She noticed that the surface of the stairs "a couple of steps down" looked icy. She briefly considered asking the nanny to let her come through the house to use the interior stairs but, because she did not know the nanny, elected to proceed carefully down the stairs. She began to advance down the stairs holding onto the uprights with her right hand. At some point she slipped and fell all the way down the stairs to the brick landing.
5  Mrs. Mainardi was wearing leather shoes with rubber "Topy" soles. They had metal "Blakey" shoe protectors on one side of the heel. They had flat heels. I am satisfied that there was nothing dangerous or unsuitable about her footwear.
6  After falling, Mrs. Mainardi reported that she was dazed. After a short time she called for help. However, nobody responded to her calls. She then managed to stand and proceeded to walk to her business premises 1-1/2 blocks away. When she arrived she was bleeding from her mouth and nose and holding her injured arm. There her bookkeeper, Ms. Dykes, attended to her and called her daughter, Angela, from another business location a few blocks away. Mrs. Mainardi's granddaughter, Tamara, and her grandson, Christopher, were at the travel agency when she arrived. Tamara was sent by Ms. Dykes to look for Mrs. Mainardi's purse. She did not have the purse when she arrived at the office and could not remember where it was. Tamara went to the Shannon residence to look for the purse but did not find it (Mrs. Mainardi had left it in her locked vehicle under the seat).
7  Tamara observed the condition of the stairs at the Shannon home during the course of her search for the purse. She walked up the middle of the stairs. She said "they had a bit of white on them" and that "they were looking frosty". She was wearing new running shoes and was able to walk up the stairs "casually" without slipping. When descended the stairs, however, she slipped after about four stairs but was able to steady herself and avoid falling. She reported that each step was frosty over its entire surface but added that if the steps had been "really, really icy" she would not have walked up them. She said that she noticed that the grass was damp and there was some frost on the ground when she walked down the street on which the residence is located. Tamara then returned to the travel agency and informed Ms. Dykes that she had been unable to find Mrs. Mainardi's purse.
8  Ms. Dykes then left the travel agency and walked to the Shannon residence to see if she could locate the purse. When she arrived, she observed blood on the brick landing where Mrs. Mainardi had landed after her fall. She said she observed that the railings on the steps were too wide to get a grip on and that she could see icy patches on the tread portion of the lower stairs. Ms. Dykes also reported that "all of the surface [of the stairs] was covered by glaze or something". She elected not to climb the 10 wooden stairs because of their condition and did not observe the tread portion of the upper few stairs.
9  Ms. Gisela Bradley, the nanny who answered the door at the Shannon home, did not learn of Mrs. Mainardi's fall until some time later on the morning of December 23rd. After learning of the fall, she went outside with Dr. Shannon's 10-year-old daughter, Tessa, to inspect the stairs. They found blood at the bottom of the stairs and Miss Shannon found a tooth. They cleaned up the blood. Neither one of them had any difficulty negotiating the stairs and they reported seeing no moisture or ice on the stairs.
THE EVIDENCE
10  Dr. Shannon testified that he is a careful homeowner and attends to any dangerous conditions on his premises when they come to his attention. He had the front stairs of the residence rebuilt in 1993. In 1998, Mr. Shannon engaged Mr. Stewart McKenna to repaint the stairs.
11  Mr. McKenna, a renovations contractor, testified that he painted the front stairway of the Shannon home on two occasions. The second occasion was, to the best to his recollection, the summer of 1998. The first occasion was a year or so before that. The second application of paint was required because the black paint which had been used on the stairs blistered due to its exposure to the sun and had to be replaced. Mr. McKenna reported that he stripped the stairs to bare wood, applied a base primer and three coats of latex. The top two coats consisted of specially formulated paint containing sand which provided a non-skid surface.
12  The witnesses all agreed that it was a cold morning on December 23rd. Temperature and rainfall records for the weather station at the Vancouver International Airport indicate that there was 1.6 mm of rain on December 22, 2002 but that there was no precipitation on December 23rd. The maximum temperature on December 23rd was 7.3[degrees]C and the minimum -.5[degrees]C. The hourly records indicate that the precipitation on December 22nd took place between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. and consisted of rain showers. Temperatures were below freezing on December 23rd between 5:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. but by 9:00 a.m. the temperature was 1.4[degrees]C.
13  The most reliable evidence regarding the conditions of the front stairs of the Shannon home is that of Mrs. Mainardi, Ms. Dykes and Tamara Mainardi. They were the only ones who observed the stairway at the time of, or closely proximate to, Mrs. Mainardi's fall. Their evidence that the steps were wet and icy or frosty is consistent with the records from the Vancouver International Airport which confirmed that the minimum temperatures were at or near the freezing level at the relevant time. Ms. Dykes testified that she observed ice on her wooden stairs in Pitt Meadows that morning before she left for work. Because of the distance between Pitt Meadows and East Vancouver and the absence of any evidence that would indicate that the conditions in the two places were similar on December 23, 2002, very little can be drawn from this evidence. The Vancouver International Airport is closer to the Shannon residence but, because of the probability of local variation, provides only a general picture of the weather in the Vancouver area.
14  Evidence from the weather station at the Vancouver International Airport and the recollections of the witnesses indicate that the morning of December 23, 2002 was chilly but that as the day wore on it was sunny with some clouds.
15  There were in evidence a number of photographs taken on January 3, 2000 showing various views of the stairway. It is clear from those photographs that the surface of the stairs was painted. There are no stair treads or visible indications of a non-skid finish and the painted surface is worn. The wide railings do not provide an easy grip to assist someone ascending or descending the staircase. It is also evident from the photographs that the staircase is open to the elements.
RELEVANT LEGAL PRINCIPLES
16  The duty of care imposed upon an occupier of premises is statutory in nature. Sections 3(1) and (2) of the Act read in part as follows:
An occupier of premises owes a duty to take that care that in all the circumstances of the case is reasonable to see that a person, and the person's property, on the premises, and property on the premises of a person, whether or not that person personally enters the premises, will be reasonably safe in using the premises.
The duty of care referred to in subsection (1) applies in relation to the
condition of the premises ...
17  There is no dispute that Dr. Shannon was the occupier of the premises where Mrs. Mainardi fell.
18  In Waldick v. Malcolm, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 456, the Supreme Court of Canada considered the nature of the duty imposed by the Occupiers Liability Act, R.S.O 1980 c. 315, the provisions of which are, for the purposes of the facts before me, the same as those of the British Columbia Act.
19  Mr. Justice Iacobucci delivered the judgment of the Court. Respecting the nature of the duty imposed by the statute he said (at p. 472):
After all, the statutory duty on occupiers is framed quite generally, as indeed it must be. That duty is to take reasonable care in the circumstances to make the premises safe. That duty does not change but the factors which are relevant to an assessment of what constitutes reasonable care will necessarily be very specific to each fact situation -- thus the proviso "such care as in all the circumstances of the case is reasonable". [emphasis in the original]
20  He went on to say (at p. 477):
The goals of the Act are to promote, and indeed, require where circumstances warrant, positive action on the part of occupiers to make their premises reasonably safe.
21  In applying the duty imposed by the Act to the facts of an individual case there are a number of propositions of law that are well established by the jurisprudence.
The plaintiff bears the onus of proving on a balance of probabilities that the occupier breached his or her duty of care.
A presumption of negligence is not created by the fact that the plaintiff was injured. The plaintiff must establish that some act or failure to act on the part of the occupier resulted in his or her injury: (Bauman v. Stein  (B.C.C.A.)).
The duty of care imposed by the Act does not require the occupier to remove every possibility of danger -- the test is one of reasonableness, not perfection: (Gerak v. British Columbia  (C.A.) (leave to appeal to S.C.C. refused; Carlson v. Canada Safeway Ltd.  (C.A.)).
The Court is not entitled to resort to speculation when determining the cause of the plaintiff's fall and subsequent injury. The plaintiff must prove the nexus between his or her fall and the occupier's failure to discharge his or her duty of care: (Cropley v. Daishinpan (Canada) Ltd., ,  [paragraph] 22).
The care that an occupier must take differs according to the nature and use of the premises: (Kayser v. Park Royal Shopping Centre Ltd.  (C.A.)).
The occupier need not, in all cases, show that he or she had a specific policy in place to deal with the maintenance of the portion of the premises where the fall occurred. The nature of the premises will determine whether or not a maintenance scheme will be required: (Leduc v. Goodwill Investments Ltd.,  (S.C.) [paragraph] 20).
APPLICATION TO THE FACTS
22  I am satisfied by the evidence of Ms. Dykes, Mrs. Mainardi and Tamara Mainardi that the stairway was treacherously slippery at the time that Mrs. Mainardi fell. I am also satisfied that it was the slippery condition of the stairway that caused Mrs. Mainardi's fall.
23  The condition of the premises that led to Mrs. Mainardi's fall was the slippery nature of the exposed, painted stairway. It is not necessary for the plaintiff to establish that Dr. Shannon knew of the conditions in existence at the time she fell -- only that the condition of the front staircase was such that a reasonable occupier would have been alerted to the likelihood that the stairs would be slippery and dangerous if ice or frost formed on them. While the primary means of access to the home was the back door, I accept Dr. Shannon's evidence that the front door was often used when he and his children left the home for family activities in the neighbourhood. The non-skid finish that had been applied to the stairs some four and one-half years earlier by Mr. McKenna was either no longer there or had been rendered ineffective through wear and exposure to the elements. That is apparent from the slippery conditions observed and experienced by Tamara Mainardi and Mrs. Mainardi as well as the appearance of the stair treads in the photographs. Dr. Shannon either knew or ought to have known of the worn condition and the absence of an effective non-skid finish at the time of Mrs. Mainardi's fall.
24  Mrs. Mainardi was aware of the potentially slippery condition of the stairway. She considered returning to the door and asking Ms. Bradley, whom she did not know, to allow her into the house so that she could use the interior stairs. She concluded that it would be inappropriate to do so, although in retrospect it would have been the wiser course. She approached the stairs cautiously, she was not wearing inappropriate footwear and she held onto the wooden uprights which provided the only support available to her. In all the circumstances, given the social realities of the situation, I am not prepared to say that Mrs. Mainardi's course of action constituted contributory negligence.
25  I am satisfied that the plaintiff has established that the defendant breached his duty of care to her and that the breach of duty was the cause of her fall and injury.
DISPOSITION
26  Mrs. Mainardi is entitled to judgment for <damage type = "total">$50,000</damage>, the agreed amount of damages.
27  Unless there are matters concerning costs that have to be spoken to, Mrs. Mainardi is entitled to her costs on scale 3.
28  I would like to thank both counsel for their competent, professional and helpful presentation of this case.
PRESTON J.
End of Document
0813054 B.C. Ltd. v. Overland West Freight Lines Ltd., [2013] B.C.J. No. 2829
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Vancouver, British Columbia
E.J. Adair J.
Heard: November 18 and 19, 2013.
Oral judgment: November 29, 2013.
Docket: S103468
Registry: Vancouver
[2013] B.C.J. No. 2829   |   2013 BCSC 2367
Between 0813054 B.C. Ltd., Plaintiff, and Overland West Freight Lines Ltd., and Mandala Custom Homes Inc., Defendants
(67 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — For torts — Affecting property — Personal property — Application by the plaintiff for summary trial judgment allowed in part — Plaintiff sued Overland West for loss of goods valued at $117,640 and consequential damages of $42,768 — Overland transported fabricated parts for construction of a commercial building for plaintiff — Goods lost in an accident — Plaintiff awarded $117,640 for value of goods and $5,000 as consequential damages — It was reasonably foreseeable that plaintiff would likely incur some additional expenses and costs thrown away as a consequence of the delay involved in replacing the goods lost.
Transportation law — Carriers — Contracts of carriage — Bills of lading — Conditions of carriage — Liability — Limitation of liability — Application by the plaintiff for summary trial judgment allowed in part — Plaintiff sued Overland West for loss of goods valued at $117,640 and consequential damages of $42,768 — Overland transported fabricated parts for construction of a commercial building for plaintiff — Goods lost in an accident — Overland not entitled to rely on bill of lading to limit its liability — Bill of lading did not contain description of the particulars of the goods or the weight of the goods and did not comply with Motor Vehicle Act Regulations.
Applications by the defendant Overland West the plaintiff for summary trial judgment. The plaintiff sued Overland for loss of goods valued at $117,640 and consequential damages of $42,768. Overland transported component parts of a prefabricated commercial building that the defendant Mandala Inc. was to build for the plaintiff to operate a retail store. Overland argued that its liability was limited to two dollars per pound actual weight of the goods lost pursuant to the terms of a bill of lading. Mandala had arranged for the shipping of the parts. When Overland issued the bill of lading, the description of the particulars of the goods was incomplete and the weight column was blank. A weight was added after the accident to ensure that Overland's paperwork was complete. 

HELD: Plaintiff's application allowed in part.
 The bill of lading was not enforceable to limit Overland's liability because it was not completed as required by the Motor Vehicle Act Regulations. It was Overland's obligation to ensure that the bill of lading, with the information required to be completed, was properly issued and showed particulars of the goods in the shipment, including weight and description. Overland's liability was strict and it was not necessary for the plaintiff to prove negligence. Any consequential damages must be based on what was reasonably foreseeable. It would be reasonably foreseeable that someone in the plaintiff's position would likely incur some additional expenses and also some costs thrown away as a consequence of the delay involved in replacing the particular goods lost. Therefore, some rent, some financing costs and some additional expenses were recoverable and were assessed at <damage type = "special">$5,000</damage>.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Motor Vehicle Act Regulations, (1)
Counsel
Counsel for the Plaintiff: J.P. Scouten.
Counsel for the Defendant Overland West Freight Lines Ltd.: H.D. Edinger.
Counsel for the Defendant Mandala Custom Homes Inc.: C.R.J. Cook.
Oral Reasons for Judgment
E.J. ADAIR J. (orally)
1   This is a claim for damages arising out of the loss in transit on April 7, 2010 of component parts of a prefabricated commercial building that was being transported by the defendant Overland from Nelson to Fort Nelson. The building had been purchased by the plaintiff from the defendant Mandala.
2  There is no dispute that the value of the building components destroyed in the accident is <damage type = "other">$117,640.59</damage> including taxes.
3  Both the plaintiff and the defendant Overland apply for judgment on a summary trial.
4  The plaintiff seeks judgment against Overland for the value of the goods lost (<damage type = "other">$117,640.59</damage>). It also seeks consequential damages in the sum of <damage type = "other">$42,768.70</damage>. The plaintiff abandoned its claim for loss of profits.
5  Overland says that its liability is limited to <damage type = "other">$2</damage> per pound actual weight of the goods lost, pursuant to the terms of a bill of lading dated April 6, 2010. It seeks a declaration in that regard and a declaration concerning the actual weight of the goods.
6  The defendant Mandala, who designed and manufactured the building components and who was involved in filling out the bill of lading, supports the plaintiff's application.
7  All parties agree that, despite some imperfections and conflicts in the evidence, and although a slice (at least) of the litigation would remain, the issues on the applications are suitable for determination on a summary trial, and, particularly in the light of the amount involved, the parties wish to have those issues determined now.
8  I agree that, in the circumstances, the issues can be determined on a summary trial and that it would not be unjust to decide the issues raised on the applications.
9  The issues are:
whether the bill of lading is enforceable by Overland to limit its liability?
if the bill of lading is enforceable, what is the weight of the goods lost?
if the bill of lading is not enforceable, what damages are recoverable by the plaintiff, and, in particular, are consequential damages recoverable?
10  The background facts are, for the most part, straightforward.
11  The plaintiff owns and operates a retail store in Fort Nelson under the name "Down to Earth Health Shop." The store sells health food products and ecologically responsible goods such as clothing, housewares, cosmetics and purified water. The plaintiff also operates a café in the store. The plaintiff's principals are Kevin Friesen and Kymberley Gillett, his wife.
12  Prior to mid-2010, the plaintiff's business was operated out of leased premises. In 2009, the plaintiff made plans to expand the business to a larger facility and purchased property on 51st Avenue in Fort Nelson, intending to build a new commercial premises there. The plan was to construct the new premises in two phases. Phase 1 was going to consist of a new commercial building to serve as the retail shop and café, and phase 2 was going to be a second building to be built later and connected to the first.
13  The plaintiff retained Mandala to custom design and build a prefabricated building for phase 1.
14  The plaintiff's plan was to complete the building in time for the new premises to be opened to the public by July 1, 2010. The plan was then to give Mandala the go-ahead to construct the phase 2 building so that it could be completed and open to the public by December 1, 2010. None of these plans was communicated to Overland.
15  Although not required to do so, as a courtesy to customers, Mandala sometimes assisted customers with making shipping arrangements. It did so for the plaintiff by contacting Overland.
16  Mandala does not have scales capable of weighing materials of the size of the parts of the building. The weight of the materials is not something that is important for Mandala's business. According to Jenny Henri, Mandala's office manager, the expectation is that the trucking company will weigh the load as required, and Mandala is not really interested in getting involved in shipping. Ms. Henri explained that if Mandala is helping to arrange shipping for a customer, Mandala will usually do a "guesstimate" (her word) of the weight, and usually "guesstimates" 40,000 to 50,000 pounds for a 48 to 53 foot flatbed truck.
17  On March 22, 2010, Ms. Henri contacted Overland by email requesting a quote for a shipment of a 53 foot trailer load from Nelson (the original email said to Fort St. John, but that is a mistake and nothing turns on it) to Fort Nelson. Ms. Henri estimated the weight as 50,000 pounds and stated that the load would be "prefabricated components for a commercial building." She also indicated that there would be two loads.
18  Ms. Henri and Mr. Len Rubner (Overland's Castlegar Terminal manager) exchanged further email messages on March 30 and 31. Mr. Rubner inquired whether the loads were "for sure" 50,000 pounds, and asked whether they needed tarping. Ms. Henri responded that "50,000 is a guess -- we're shipping a prefabricated commercial building." She also confirmed the load would require tarping.
19  Arrangements were made between Ms. Henri and Mr. Rubner for Overland to collect the first load on April 6, 2010. Mandala informed Mr. Friesen and Ms. Gillett of the arrangements that had been made, that Mandala would be loading the first shipment on April 6, and that the shipment would be driven to Fort Nelson the following day.
20  The loading process typically takes seven to eight hours for a standard home package, and Mandala typically requests that trucks doing the shipping arrive early in the morning. Unfortunately, Overland's truck did not arrive at Mandala until the afternoon on April 6, and, generally speaking, the loading of the shipment did not go smoothly, at least from Mandala's perspective.
21  Mr. Darrol Gallagher is the Overland driver who picked up the shipment on April 6 at Mandala. He has provided an affidavit describing the events as he recalled them. He could not recall whether he provided a blank bill of lading to Mandala or whether they already had one, but he said if Mandala did not have one, he would have provided one. He described his observations of the loading and arrangements that were made to tarp the load. He said that after he and a colleague finished tarping the shipment, he left the loading area and went into the Mandala offices. According to Mr. Gallagher, he there "met with" Mr. Chris Armstrong of Mandala and "obtained what appeared to be a completed bill of lading and building plans" for the shipment. He said that "on receiving the bill of lading," he detached and returned a carbon copy to Mr. Armstrong and then drove the shipment to Overland's Castlegar terminal.
22  In his evidence, Mr. Armstrong on the other hand described circumstances that started off badly by the late arrival of the Overland truck and deteriorated into frustration, impatience and acrimony. According to Mr. Armstrong, at one point Mr. Gallagher gave him a form to fill out, something that Mr. Armstrong never did because typically such matters were dealt with by Ms. Henri or the office staff. However, by this time, they were no longer around. Mr. Armstrong called asking Mr. Gallagher about the form and what needed to be on it. According to Mr. Armstrong, he and Mr. Gallagher argued over whether the load was going to be tarped, and resolving the tarping issue created more delay, frustration and irritation.
23  Mr. Armstrong had filled in some of the information on the bill of lading and signed it. He then left it on his desk and went to see what else could be loaded on to the truck. He felt that he could not complete the form until the truck was fully loaded. It was then well into the evening. Mr. Armstrong and Mr. Gallagher continued to argue about tarping.
24  Mr. Armstrong says that he and Mr. Gallagher had a conversation in Mr. Armstrong's office, and by this point Mr. Gallagher was (according to Mr. Armstrong) very angry and exasperated. Mr. Armstrong describes Mr. Gallagher as grabbing the bill of lading off Mr. Armstrong's desk, ripping out a copy, which he threw at Mr. Armstrong, and storming out. As far as Mr. Armstrong was concerned, the document was incomplete. In particular he had not completed the description of the goods and nothing had been filled in in the weight column.
25  The accident in which the goods were lost occurred on April 7, 2010.
26  There is no dispute that after Mr. Gallagher left Mandala with the bill of lading taken from Mr. Armstrong, and after the accident on April 7, 2010, Mr. Rubner added some information to the bill of lading. The circumstances are described in Mr. Meehan's affidavit (at paras. 27 and following, and Mr. Rubner confirms the facts stated there are true. Specifically, Mr. Rubner wrote the words "Pre-fab Warehouse" and inserted a weight in the column "weight subject to confirmation." Mr. Rubner initially inserted a weight of 40,000 pounds, essentially what is referred to in the evidence as a "cube weight." However, that weight was "whited-out" and a weight of 20,000 pounds was inserted instead.
27  After the accident, Overland made arrangements to collect the entirety of the shipment from the accident site. The components were then weighed at the Castlegar Terminal in a process described by Mr. Meehan and confirmed by Mr. Rubner (who was directly involved). Essentially, Mr. Rubner and a colleague weighed one unit of each item recovered, and then multiplied that weight by the total number of that particular unit that Mandala said was in the shipment. As a result of this process, Overland concluded that the total weight was 18,826 pounds.
28  In August 2010, Mandala shipped a replacement shipment to the plaintiff, through another carrier. There is no actual weight of that shipment. However, there is a cube weight estimated on the bill of lading. There is also a declared value noted on the bill of lading. The fact that the bill of lading contains a declared value means that the actual weight is less important because the carrier's liability will be based on the declared value, not weight.
29  Even though Overland took concrete steps to obtain a reliable weight of the goods lost, Overland's evidence concerning the actual weight is not without problems. Based on Overland's evidence, the wall sections in total weigh the most. However, only one wall section out of 44 was actually weighed. The wall sections were not uniform in size, and, in the evidence, Overland does not identify which wall section was in fact weighed or explain how the wall section that was weighed was picked.
30  On the other hand, neither the plaintiff nor Mandala ever weighed the components of the shipments (either the original or the replacement shipments) at any time. At best, Mandala's witnesses have expressed opinions and conclusions about weight, based on unknown or flimsy foundations, or based on statements in documents that are not admissible for their truth. Some of the problems are illustrated in Ms. Henri's affidavit.
31  I turn then to a discussion of the issues.
32  The first issue is whether Overland can rely on the terms of the bill of lading to limit its liability.
33  Both the plaintiff and Overland rely on s. 37.39(1) of Motor Vehicle Act Regulations, B.C. Reg. 26/58, which provides in relevant part that:
37.39 (1) Subject to this Part, if freight is accepted for shipment by or on behalf of a carrier who operates a business vehicle within the meaning of section 237 (a) or (c) of the Act, the carrier must, at the time of that acceptance, issue or cause to be issued a bill of lading in accordance with the following requirements:
a bill of lading issued under this subsection must show the following:
the name and address of the consignor (shipper);
the date of the shipment;
the originating point of the shipment;
the name of the originating carrier;
the names of connecting carriers, if any;
the name and address of the consignee (receiver of goods);
the destination of the shipment (if different from the address of the consignee);
particulars of the goods in the shipment, including weight and description;
a bill of lading issued under this subsection must also contain the following:
a provision stipulating whether the goods are received in apparent good order and condition, or otherwise;
a space to show the declared value of the shipment;
a space to indicate whether transportation charges are prepaid or collect;
a space in which to note any special agreement between the consignor and the carrier;
a statement in conspicuous form to indicate (if such is the case) that the carrier's liability is limited by a term or condition of the carrier's applicable schedule of rates or by any other agreement with the consignor;
a statement of notice of claim as provided for by Article 12 of the Specified Conditions of Carriage set out in paragraph (c);
a bill of lading issued under this subsection must be signed by the consignor or the consignor's agent and the originating carrier or that carrier's agent and must contain or incorporate by reference all the following conditions of carriage:
Specified Conditions of Carriage
...
Article 9: Subject to Article 10, the amount of any loss or damage for which the carrier is liable, whether or not such loss or damage results from negligence, is to be computed on the basis of the value of the goods at the place and time of shipment (including the freight and other charges if paid and the duty if paid or payable and not refundable) unless a lower value has been represented in writing by the consignor or has been agreed on between the parties to this bill of lading, or is determined by the classification or tariff on which the rate is based, in any of which events such lower value is the amount that governs the computation of the maximum liability of the carrier.
Article 10: The amount of any loss or damage computed under Article 9 must not exceed <damage type = "other">$2</damage>/ per pound (<damage type = "other">$4.41</damage> per kilogram), computed on the total weight of the shipment, unless a higher value is declared on the face of the bill of lading by the consignor.
...
Article 18: Subject to Article 19, any alteration, addition or erasure in the bill of lading must be signed or initialed by the consignor or the consignor's agent and the originating carrier or that carrier's agent, and unless so acknowledged is without effect, and this bill of lading is enforceable according to its original tenor.
Article 19: It is the responsibility of the consignor to show correct shipping weights of the shipment on the bill of lading if completed by the consignor. Despite Article 18, failure to do this makes the bill of lading subject to correction in this respect by the carrier.
34  Mr. Edinger, Overland's counsel, argues that Overland satisfied its obligations under the Regulations to issue a bill of lading by giving the bill of lading to Mandala to complete. If it was incomplete, and in particular if it was incomplete because the bill of lading did not show a weight, that does not affect the enforceability of the limitation of liability or Overland's ability to rely on that limitation.
35  Mr. Edinger points to Article 19 of the "Specified Conditions of Carriage," which not only permits Overland (the carrier) to alter the bill of lading in respect of the weight despite the absence of a signature or initial from the consignor or the shipper, but which also, in his submission, places the responsibility on the consignor or its agent (in this case, Mandala) to show the correct shipping weight when the consignor completes the bill of lading, as Mandala did in this case. Mr. Edinger submits that the plaintiff cannot rely on Mandala's failure to state the weight in order to avoid the limitation of liability contained in the bill of lading, given the language of Article 19.
36  On the other hand, Mr. Scouten, for the plaintiff, says that, pursuant to the Regulations, the legal obligation to issue a bill of lading rests with the carrier (in this case, Overland), and that the Regulations further require (per s. 37.39(1)(a)) that the bill of lading show specific information, in particular, particulars of the goods in the shipment, including the weight and description. He says that, on the facts, the bill of lading was incomplete in this respect and the omissions were not inconsequential.
37  Mr. Scouten argues further that Article 19 should not be interpreted in the way Mr. Edinger argues, and that the words "if completed by the consignor" have as their object the words "correct shipping weights," not (as is implicit in Mr. Edinger's argument) "the bill of lading".
38  For my purposes, the basic legal principles are summarized in Paine Machine Tool Inc. v. Can-Am West Carriers Inc., . The Regulations require a bill of lading to be issued by the carrier (see Paine, at paras. 15 and 16), and further, they impose on the carrier the burden of issuing the bill of lading showing specified facts and containing other information about the shipment (see Paine, at para. 28).
39  In principle, the Regulations should be adhered to unless it is proved that the parties agreed to other terms for their contract: see Paine, at para. 25.
40  In my opinion, the evidence does not support the conclusion that Overland and Mandala (as the plaintiff's de facto agent) agreed to other terms, and the bill of lading must be read in the context of the requirements of the Regulations. In that light, Overland was required to adhere to the Regulations, particularly if it wishes to rely on a limitation of its liability.
41  I conclude that the bill of lading is not enforceable to limit Overland's liability to <damage type = "other">$2</damage> per pound, because it was not completed as required by the Regulations. I accept Mr. Armstrong's evidence that it was Overland's driver (Mr. Gallagher) who gave him Overland's bill of lading form. I find that, although Mr. Armstrong did sign the bill of lading, he did not consider it to be complete when Mr. Gallagher took it from him. Thus, although there is technical compliance with s. 37.39(1)(c) with respect to the signature of the consignor or the consignor's agent, I find that in fact Mr. Armstrong did not intend to sign and provide to Overland an incomplete document.
42  It was Overland's obligation (pursuant to the Regulations) to ensure that the bill of lading, with the information required to be completed, was properly issued. Section 37.39(1)(a)(viii) requires that the bill of lading must show particulars of the goods in the shipment, including weight and description. The Regulations make a distinction between weight and declared value. The Regulations simply require that there be a space to show the declared value, but the weight must be shown. When Mr. Gallagher left Mandala on April 6 with the bill of lading, the description of the particulars of the goods was incomplete and the weight column was blank.
43  I do not agree with Mr. Edinger's submission that the omission of the weight in this bill of lading is at the inconsequential end of the spectrum of omissions. As Mr. Meehan explained, Overland does not treat the absence of a statement of weight as inconsequential. A weight (initially a cube weight of 40,000 pounds) was added after the accident to ensure that Overland's paperwork was complete. This indicates that Overland recognized that, when the bill of lading was collected form Mandala, it was not complete and important information was missing.
44  Moreover, I agree with Mr. Scouten's construction of Article 19 of the Specified Conditions of Carriage. Mr. Edinger's construction immediately runs into difficulties where the completion of the bill of lading is a joint effort. How much of the form would have to be filled in by the consignor before it would be considered as a whole to be "completed by the consignor"? 50%? something more, or something less?
45  Mr. Scouten's interpretation avoids such problems because the consignor or the consignor's agent is given responsibility with respect to a specific item: weight. If the consignor or its agent fails to show the correct shipping weight, then the weight -- that is, the weight shown -- is subject to correction "in this respect" by the shipper. The contract of carriage can be altered in that regard and the alteration is enforceable by the carrier despite the absence of a signature or initial from the consignor or its agent. Otherwise, amendments or alterations to the bill of lading require evidence -- in the form of a signature or initial -- of acceptance by the consignor or its agent, pursuant to Article 18.
46  Here, however, there was nothing filled in by the shipper in the weight column. There was therefore nothing that could be "subject to correction." Overland gains no assistance from Article 19.
47  I conclude therefore that Overland did not issue a bill of lading as required by the Regulations, and it would be inappropriate for Overland to be allowed to rely on the benefits of the limitation of liability when it failed to comply with the obligations that the Regulations impose.
48  In view of my conclusion on the first issue, it is unnecessary for me to address the second, namely, what is the actual weight.
49  I turn then to damages.
50  Overland's liability is strict and it is not necessary for the plaintiff to prove negligence. There is no issue concerning the value of the lost goods. The dispute concerns the consequential losses claimed.
51  The particulars are set out in Mr. Friesen's affidavit, at para. 50. Mr. Scouten says that (with the possible exception of the heating costs, and the claim for lost profits, which has been abandoned), the amounts set out in para. 50 of Mr. Friesen's affidavit are recoverable as consequential damages.
52  Mr. Edinger submits that nothing is recoverable because the amounts claimed are too remote. Alternatively, he submits that only a relatively modest amount would be recoverable as damages resulting from the delay, and nothing more.
53  The basic principles are set out in, for example, B.D.C. Ltd. v. Hofstrand Farms Ltd., , at paras. 24 and following, and in Lengert Machinery Sales Ltd. v. Kordyban Transport Ltd.,  (C.A.), at para. 5. They involve the application of the well-known rules in Hadley v. Baxendale, 156 E.R. 145.
54  Here, Overland had no knowledge of any special circumstances respecting the plaintiff. Indeed, Overland had virtually no knowledge about the plaintiff or its circumstances generally. Overland never dealt directly with the plaintiff. Overland knew only that it was being asked to ship component parts of a commercial building to Fort Nelson.
55  In those circumstances any consequential damages must be based on what a reasonable person would be taken to know in the ordinary course of things (this is the first rule in Hadley v. Baxendale) or, in other words, what would be reasonably foreseeable.
56  On this point I agree generally with Mr. Edinger's alternative submissions.
57  Overland knew that it was transporting component parts of a commercial building, and I think a reasonable person would be taken to know, in the ordinary course of things, that a commercial building is most likely going to be used in the operating and running of a business. However, I do not see the expenses claimed in Mr. Friesen's affidavit at para. 50(c) as falling within what would be reasonably foreseeable. The heating expenses described in subparagraph (e) are expenses that would have been incurred if the building had been erected as planned, since the plan was to have the business up and operating. They are not damages caused by the loss of the goods.
58  On the other hand, in my view, it would be reasonably foreseeable that someone in the plaintiff's position would likely incur some additional expenses and also some costs thrown away as a consequence of the delay involved in replacing the particular goods lost; therefore, some rent, some financing costs and the type of expenses described in Mr. Friesen's affidavit at para. 50(b). Although somewhat rough and ready, I therefore assess consequential damages at <damage type = "special">$5,000</damage>.
59  In summary, the plaintiff will therefore have judgment against Overland for <damage type = "total">$122,640.59</damage> (<damage type = "sub-total">$117,640.59</damage> plus <damage type = "other">$5,000</damage>), together with court order interest.
60  Unless counsel wish to make submissions, costs will follow the event. And I wish to say that I am indebted to counsel for their well-prepared material and their helpful submissions.
61  Do counsel wish to make any submissions concerning costs?
62  MR. SCOUTEN: I have no submissions today.
63  THE COURT: Is there anything further that we need to deal with this morning?
64  MR. EDINGER: I don't think so, except I think at the end of the day it would be my obligation to take the binders away from you, My Lady.
65  THE COURT: Well, Mr. Edinger, I have marked up the contents of the binders, so I will keep them.
66  MR. EDINGER: I am happy with that. I didn't bring quite a big enough bag to bring them anyway, so I am happy with that result. Thank you, My Lady.
67  THE COURT: Thank you.
E.J. ADAIR J.
End of Document
Rhodes v. Biggar, [2010] B.C.J. No. 1022
British Columbia Judgments
British Columbia Supreme Court
Kelowna, British Columbia
L.D. Russell J.
Heard: February 8-12, 2010.
Judgment: May 28, 2010.
Docket: 07-4430
Registry: Victoria
[2010] B.C.J. No. 1022   |   2010 BCSC 762   |   190 A.C.W.S. (3d) 451   |   2010 CarswellBC 1344
Between Andree Germaine Rhodes, Plaintiff, and Gayle Cecile Biggar, Defendant
(198 paras.)
Case Summary
Damages — Physical and psychological injuries — Body injuries — Soft tissue — Considerations impacting on award — Age of claimant — Pre-existing injury — Credibility — Action by 57-year-old dental hygienist for damages for injuries sustained in 2005 car accident allowed — Accident aggravated and accelerated impact of pre-existing problems from 1999 crush injury for which plaintiff continued to seek treatment — Plaintiff understated impact of pre-existing injury on her current problems, which limited her to working nine hours per week and restricted her ability to garden — Plaintiff lacked credibility — Total award of $144,984 resulted from reduction of awards by 25 percent based on pre-existing condition — Plaintiff likely to work same hours for three more years, and would require personal training and gardening assistance.
Damages — Types of damages — General damages — For personal injuries — Considerations — Aggravation of pre-existing injury — Pre-existing medical conditions — Cost of future care — Loss of earning capacity — Loss of housekeeping ability — Retroactive loss of income — Special damages — Non-pecuniary loss — Pain and suffering — Action by 57-year-old dental hygienist for damages for injuries sustained in 2005 car accident allowed — Accident aggravated and accelerated impact of pre-existing problems from 1999 crush injury for which plaintiff continued to seek treatment — Plaintiff understated impact of pre-existing injury on her current problems, which limited her to working nine hours per week and restricted her ability to garden — Plaintiff lacked credibility — Total award of $144,984 resulted from reduction of awards by 25 percent based on pre-existing condition — Plaintiff likely to work same hours for three more years, and would require personal training and gardening assistance.
Action by Rhodes against Biggar for damages for personal injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident. Rhodes, a 57-year-old dental hygienist, had an extensive medical history relating to a 1999 crush injury, causing serious neck, shoulder and back problems for which she still underwent treatment at the time of her accident with Biggar. She never returned to full time work. In November 2005, Rhodes' vehicle was struck by Biggar's vehicle. Biggar admitted liability for the collision, conceding Rhodes sustained soft tissues injuries to her neck, back, shoulder, arm and hip. Rhodes missed six months of work after the accident. She was in another motor vehicle accident in 2007. Three weeks after the 2007 accident, Rhodes tried to increase her work hours but found the pain in her pain prevented this. Rhodes used pain medication and several therapies. She described low back pain, shoulder pain and hip pain as the main problems restricting her to working nine hours per week. She was unable to garden. She did not advise the health care practitioners who treated her after the 2005 accident about the extent of her pre-existing problems. She admitted she earned about $17,000 in 2009, in addition to $6,500 in undeclared rental income from a tenant in her home. Her family physician was reluctant to admit the 2005 accident merely exacerbated Rhodes' pre-existing problems, but letters the physician wrote to her disability insurers showed she was aware the 1999 injury had been devastating to Rhodes' ability to work. A massage therapist who treated Rhodes both before and after her accident with Biggar admitted many other dental hygienists came to her for treatment similar to that which Rhodes' received due to the physical demands of the job. An orthopaedic surgeon who saw Rhodes after the 2005 accident opined her condition was not likely to ever completely resolve. He had limited information about Rhodes' pre-accident condition. A doctor who examined Rhodes for the defence initially opined she sustained debilitating injuries in the 2005 accident, but revised his opinion after reviewing Rhodes' pre-accident medical records. The doctor then found the 2005 accident accelerated the deterioration of Rhodes' condition but did not cause it. 

HELD: Action allowed.
 Rhodes received <damage type = "total">$144,984</damage> in damages. Rhodes understated the extent to which her problems were attributable to the 1999 injury. She was not credible given that she had concealed income from tax authorities. Rhodes' physician demonstrated such sympathy for Rhodes that the court could not accept her opinion. The orthopaedic surgeon was unable to provide an accurate assessment of the impact of the 2005 accident without a clear picture of Rhodes' pre-accident condition. The defence expert's opinion was the most helpful because he reviewed Rhodes' complete medical history. Rhodes' current condition was not attributable completely to the 2005 accident. The accident accelerated and aggravated her difficulties, but her pre-existing problems would have interfered with her lifestyle in any event. Non-pecuniary damages of <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$60,000</damage> were discounted by 25 percent to <damage type = "reduction to">$45,000</damage> to take this into account. She was awarded <damage type = "past income loss">$63,684</damage> for past income loss, based on the assumption she would have worked 14 hours per week until the trial date but for the 2005 accident. For future income loss, the court assumed Rhodes would work the same hours for three more years until retiring. The figure of <damage type = "future wage loss">$38,100</damage> was discounted by 25 based on her pre-existing condition. Rhodes was awarded <damage type = "sub-future care">$1000</damage> for the cost of a personal trainer and <damage type = "sub-future care">$800</damage> for gardening help. Special costs claimed of <damage type = "special">$7,939</damage> were also reduced by 25 percent.
Statutes, Regulations and Rules Cited:
Court Order Interest Act, RSBC 1996, CHAPTER 79,
Counsel
Counsel for Plaintiff: M.L. Pohorecky.
Counsel for Defendant: R.D. Shaw.
[Editor's note: A correction was released by the Court May 31, 2010; the change has been made to the text and the correction is appended to this document.]
Reasons for Judgment
L.D. RUSSELL J.
1   On November 26, 2005, the plaintiff was travelling northbound on Highway 97 heading to her home outside Vernon, BC after doing some Christmas shopping.
2  As she reached the town of Winfield, she stopped for a red light and then proceeded towards the next traffic light. It turned green and she started through it when the defendant's car, on her right and at a red light, came into the intersection and hit her car's passenger side (the "Accident").
3  The plaintiff described the impact as being hard but it did not cause her car's airbags to deploy.
4  The plaintiff was extracted from the car with the use of the Jaws of Life. Neither door on her car would open. She was taken to Kelowna General Hospital by ambulance but was not admitted. She was suffering neck and back pain at the accident scene.
5  The plaintiff was driving a 1998 Saturn and it was written off. I have no evidence of the kind and age of car the defendant was driving but it was also written off.
6  At trial, counsel admitted liability on the part of the now deceased defendant.
ISSUES
7  The usual heads of damage are sought by the plaintiff in this case.
8  The main issue is that of causation, since the defendant alleges the plaintiff suffers from a pre-existing condition which would have resulted in reducing her hours of work as she aged in any event of the Accident.
9  It is also alleged that a second accident on June 8, 2007, for which she was at fault, exacerbated her largely resolved injuries. This accident resulted in her 2006 Toyota Corolla being written off due to extensive damage to the driver's side rear passenger door.
FACTS
10  The plaintiff has an extensive pre-existing medical history relating to a serious crush injury and repair surgery to her left hand in 1999. Associated with this injury are neck, shoulder and back problems resulting from the necessity for her to change the positions in which she performs her work as a dental hygienist since she could no longer hold the mirror with which she works in her left hand.
11  The crush injury caused the plaintiff to miss several months of work and then to return to work for a reduced schedule of two days a week, for a total of 14 hours a week.
12  From the time of her return to work in 2000 to the time of the Accident in November 2005, the plaintiff was regularly attending for massage therapy and physiotherapy on her back, shoulder and neck.
13  This regular use of treatment was in the plaintiff's words, for preventive maintenance. She explained that it helped to deal with the tenderness that develops from muscle tension. Muscle tension is a problem for her since she must stay in one position for long periods of time while working in a patient's mouth.
14  Another dental hygienist gave evidence that she goes for massage regularly to deal with the muscle tension that develops in her back and neck as a result of her duties.
15  As part of her application to continue receipt of disability benefits related to the substantial loss of function in her left hand, the plaintiff underwent examination of her back, shoulder and neck in 2001 by Dr. Christian, a Vernon orthopaedic surgeon. At that time he opined that he did not think the problems with her back, shoulder and neck were a substantial impediment to her ability to perform part-time work. However, he also indicated that it was his view the plaintiff could well suffer increasing debilitation as she aged and she would have to cut her work hours even more as a result of the injury to her left hand.
16  Dr. Christian was called as an expert by the plaintiff and cross-examined by the defendant. I will deal with his current expert report later in my reasons.
17  The plaintiff has been able to maintain her lifestyle notwithstanding her much reduced work schedule by way of disability insurance policies she purchased in the early 90s.
18  After the Accident, the plaintiff was off work for approximately six months. She returned to work on a graduated basis, first working on friends and family without charge to be certain she could perform her duties safely, and finally returning to her duties for payment on a further reduced schedule of two part-time days a week, a total of nine hours per week.
19  Shortly after the second accident, in fact three weeks following it, the plaintiff attempted to increase her hours of work to three part-time days a week. She attempted this new schedule for three weeks before the increased pain and fatigue in her neck, back, arm and hand made it clear she was unable to tolerate the increase in hours.
20  The plaintiff is, by all accounts, a dedicated dental hygienist who enjoys her work and is determined to continue with it as long as she is able.
21  She gained her qualifications when she was a single mother of three and endured long hours of study on little income.
22  At the time of the Accident she was working for a dentist in Vernon at a rate of <damage type = "other">$39</damage> per hour for 14 hours per week. She has continued to work for him although she states some concern for the security of her employment on such a reduced basis.
23  The defendant concedes that the plaintiff suffered soft tissue injury to her neck, back, shoulder, left elbow, right knee and hip, and had headaches which increased in severity and frequency following the Accident.
24  The plaintiff was 57 years old at the time of the Accident.
25  The plaintiff addressed the pain she felt following the Accident with pain medications prescribed by her long-time family physician, Dr. Grieve, and also with physiotherapy, massage therapy, hydrotherapy, exercise, yoga and pain injections from Dr. Etheridge, a pain control expert.
26  The plaintiff also saw a psychologist 8 to 10 times to deal with nightmares, insomnia, depression, lack of concentration and a sense of helplessness over her inability to do what she had previously been able to do.
27  She described being unable to make meals or do housework without resting after about 15 minutes of activity. From being an independent active person, she became slow and weak.
28  She believes her injuries plateaued in March 2007, 18 months after the Accident, and have become part of her life. They are worse with some activities but generally stay at the same level. She describes the pain in her neck and back as a constant dull ache. The initial trouble she had with swallowing, nausea and dizziness got better after two to three months, about the same time that her knee injury resolved. Her elbow took about six months to heal. Her right hand and arm were very restricted in mobility for three months but are fully resolved now.
29  The headaches have continued to date and she states she has never been without a headache since the Accident although the pain has decreased to more of a dull ache.
30  She takes anti-inflammatories, antacids, Trazodone,(a painkiller) and Tylenol 3, after work. In addition, she takes sleeping pills since she has difficulty getting comfortable in bed and falling asleep. From her occasional use of sleeping aids before the Accident, she now uses them every night.
31  The plaintiff says the Accident has changed her life and the way she has always done things for herself.
32  Her low back gives her consistent discomfort which is different from the occasional low back symptoms she suffered from the changes of position occasioned by the crush injury to her left hand.
33  The plaintiff described her low back pain as lasting to the present. It is made worse at work and if she attempts to do heavy housework. She acknowledges that she had low back muscle pain after the hand injury but it would come and go and did not affect her activities of daily living. Massage would loosen the muscle tension and she would be free of pain. Before the Accident, she had never had a prescription to address her neck and back pain.
34  Pain in her shoulders fluctuates and is located mainly in the back of her right shoulder, and moves up into her skull. It increases when she works on her computer, when she bends, when she cuts vegetables, when she is cooking, and if she attempts to clean windows or floors. When she is at work, holding the same position for a period of time as she is required to do, her shoulder causes pain. Driving aggravates symptoms in her shoulder, neck, head and low back.
35  The plaintiff suffered tendonitis in her shoulder before the Accident but not with the same level of pain and not in the same location. The pain from her tendonitis was in her shoulder joint and is now in the shoulder blade towards the spine.
36  Her right hip gives her intermittent pain depending on the intensity of her activity.
37  The plaintiff described her return to work as the hardest thing she has ever done. She was off for six months and then spent two to three months relearning her job while in pain. This was the period of time she spent working for free on friends and family to demonstrate to her dentist that it was safe for her to work on patients.
38  In July 2007, she attempted to increase her hours to 13 a week without success. This was three weeks after her second accident.
39  The plaintiff does not have a pension plan of her own. So after her hand injury she determined she would continue to work 14 hours a week as long as she was able. She points to the further reduction in her work hours to nine hours a week as having serious financial consequences for her.
40  The plaintiff did not call her employer as a witness. Nonetheless, she asserts that her job is not secure because her employer could earn more money from a hygienist who could work longer hours.
41  For a period of time following the Accident, the plaintiff was unable to do housework, make meals or do yard work. Currently, she does a little housework but hires someone to do the heavy work for three hours every two weeks and she maintains the house in the interim. Her daughters occasionally visit and help out with cleaning. Her 87-year old mother vacuumed for her last year. Her ex-husband helps occasionally with yard work since she can no longer rake or prune.
42  In cross-examination, the plaintiff proved to be somewhat argumentative when asked about a form she prepared in September 2000 for Heidi Chamberlain, a massage therapist.
43  This form (Exhibit 4), the Confidential Case History, is a self-report of the plaintiff's problems for which she was consulting Ms. Chamberlain. The plaintiff was not prepared to agree that her memory of her situation at that time was better than it is at this point. As well, despite the fact the plaintiff indicated that her hand injury and its consequences affected her work, vacuuming, and yard work, she denied the injury affected her life because she could stop the activity which caused her pain. However, she also indicated that the injury interfered with her work, sleep and daily routine.
44  The plaintiff agreed that Ms. Chamberlain treated her neck, back, shoulder and arm symptoms on her return to work from her hand injury. She attended Ms. Chamberlain from 1999 to 2002, and then returned after a break in 2003 for preventive purposes. She also went for the occasional flare-up of pain and her visits continued when she had pain in her neck and shoulder right up to the date of the Accident.
45  The plaintiff also agreed that her doctor had reported to her disability insurer that the plaintiff suffered from secondary neck, back and shoulder pain as a result of the hand injury.
46  When the plaintiff saw Dr. Christian in 2008 at the request of her counsel, she told him she had never had much in the way of back pain in the past. Her explanation for the difference between what her doctor had said and what she told Dr. Christian was that her back pain was only "periodic" before the Accident.
47  In her 2008 appointment, she did not recall telling him about her earlier neck and back pain before the Accident. She justified this omission by saying she assumed he had her previous history from her visit to him in 2001 and so there was no need to tell him of her earlier problems.
48  However, she also stated she did not tell Dr. Christian about her visit to him in 2001 because she did not feel her hand injury was relevant. As well, when she saw him in 2001, she did not view her back, neck and shoulder problems as the major issue at the time.
49  Although she recalled seeing him in 2001, she stated she was not sure he was the same person and she did not think of asking him although the possibility he was the same doctor "entered her mind".
50  The plaintiff also saw Dr. Gropper, an orthopaedic surgeon who specializes in hand trauma, in October 2008.
51  Dr. Gropper took a medical history in which he indicated at page 4 that the plaintiff had suffered tendonitis in the past but had had no other specific health issues. The plaintiff did not recall if Dr. Gropper had asked her about previous neck, back and shoulder issues. She did not volunteer this information because she did not believe her pre-Accident condition was a major issue.
52  The plaintiff argued with defendant's counsel over the characterization of her earlier neck, back and shoulder problems as an "injury" which presumably meant her condition did not need to be raised with the doctors she consulted. She also appeared to feel that because she could deal with her problems through massage and preventive maintenance, she did not need to discuss them as they were not relevant.
53  With respect to the neck, back and shoulder symptoms related to her job and caused partly by the change of position occasioned by her hand injury, she agreed that it was not uncommon for dental hygienists to suffer pain in those areas so it was "not a big deal".
54  The accident of June 2007 did not cause the plaintiff any injury or aggravate her existing Accident injuries despite the fact there was major damage from the impact to her car. She pulled out from a parking lot and was hit by a pickup truck. The damage to her car was so extensive the car was written off due to the replacement value insurance she carried. An ambulance was called but she did not go to hospital.
55  Following her return to work from the Accident, she worked four hours on Wednesdays and five hours on Fridays. In July 2007, she attempted to add another four-hour day to her schedule but without success. She found the extra hours too fatiguing and overwhelming and needed the interval between work times to recover.
56  The plaintiff now hires a gardening service for more than 50% of her yard work where before the Accident she did at least 75% of it herself.
57  The income tax summary provided by the plaintiff showed income of almost <damage type = "other">$17,000</damage> in 2009, a figure close to what she earned in 2008. She agreed this was an accurate summary of her income for those years.
58  However, she was forced to admit in cross-examination that she had had a tenant in her house paying his rent in cash to her since 2005 which she has not declared on her income tax. Her explanation for her failure to report this income was not satisfactory - "a lot of paperwork", "in my tax bracket it makes almost no difference" and she agreed she had signed the declaration on her income tax returns that its contents were true and accurate. The undeclared rental income is <damage type = "other">$6,500</damage> per year.
ANALYSIS
59  The plaintiff presented as a determined person but the underlying flavour of her evidence revealed some tendency to ignore any evidence which could possibly detract from the effects of the Accident.
60  Her failure to be forthright with the examining doctors about her history of neck, shoulder and back problems is a concern to the Court and affects the comfort a trier of fact can have with the selective nature of her evidence.
61  Her concealment of income is another indicator of a troubling attitude to the truth. While concealing income from the tax authorities may be more common than we care to admit, in my view it is an indicator of a willingness to deceive that undermines the reliability of any controversial evidence provided by the plaintiff. Such an action is not honest and costs those Canadians who declare all the income they receive and pay the taxes they owe, more than they should have to pay.
62  I accept that the plaintiff suffered injury in the Accident but I also find that she is not prepared to admit the amount of wear and tear her job exerts on her back, neck and shoulder or the continuing issues from which she suffers as a result of her earlier injury.
63  I also accept that because the plaintiff enjoys her work, she would like to continue to work as long as she is able.
THE MEDICAL EVIDENCE
A. Dr. Kim Grieve
64  Dr. Kim Grieve gave evidence for the plaintiff both as an expert in Family Practice and as the plaintiff's treating physician.
65  Dr. Grieve is a dedicated physician and has no doubt given substantial support to the plaintiff since 1995 when the plaintiff first came to her.
66  Dr. Grieve has written a short report dated February 20, 2009.
67  In her report (Exhibit 8), Dr. Grieve makes a brief mention of the plaintiff's crush injury and ensuing back pain. She states:
She had traumatic tendon injuries to her left 3rd and 4th digits in 2000 [sic]. (corrected in oral evidence by Dr. Grieve to April, 1999) As a result of that injury she suffered chronic pain in her affected hand and back.
(Emphasis and correction added)
68  There is no other mention of her previous history of back pain and no mention at all of her history of neck and arm pain following the injury to the plaintiff's fingers.
69  However, in cross examination, Dr. Grieve indicated that when she said "back" it was a shorthand way of saying neck and back.
70  Dr. Grieve has written many reports to the plaintiff's disability insurers over the years. She agreed that it was important for her reports to be accurate just as she agreed it was her duty to the court to give an accurate, thorough and detailed account of the plaintiff's condition.
71  When asked if the plaintiff's injuries received in the Accident exacerbated her pre-existing condition, Dr. Grieve disagreed. However, she had written a letter to Canada Life, one of the plaintiff's disability insurers on October 3, 2006, in which she wrote as follows:
. . . Andree continues to have significant symptomatology in her neck with associated headache. This is exacerbated by her pre-existing claim or injury. As you know, she has decreased mobility in the fingers of her left hand due to a tendon injury. This in itself caused her to be fatigued and have back pain. She was only able to work part-time. (Exhibit 4, tab 3, p. 15).
72  When asked about this comment, she stated that the plaintiff had had neck and back pain before the Accident but that they were worse post-Accident. She seemed reluctant to agree to the logical extension of this comment which is what she had written above. I note as well that she stated that the Accident "set her [the plaintiff] back". Although she did not wish to say this, it seems clear that in her view the plaintiff's pre-existing injury was exacerbated by the soft tissue injuries she suffered in the Accident.
73  Dr. Grieve was also asked about a comment made in a 2001 report to Maritime Life that it was:
. . . actually surprising that she has not been completely debilitated from her own occupation and that she can work on a part time basis. Her motivation to continue to work has assisted in her at least being able to work part-time. (Exhibit 4, tab 3C, page 23)
74  Dr. Grieve repeated this comment in a letter to Canada Life dated July 27, 2001, but prepared by a somewhat less literate transcriber:
As your [sic] aware she works as a dental hygienist. She is there stooped over patients for prolonged periods of time throughout the day. She's had to make some reajustments [sic] in the way she positions her fingers and her body since the injury. This has resulted in some stress in her upper and lower back. She can't sit for prolonged periods of time without getting back, shoulder pain and pain in her fingers. She has been able to sustain working approximately six to eight days per month and if she increases this, she starts to get increase [sic] symptoms in her hands and back. For some one who did not have to use their hands in a very technical way and of such fine proprioception this injury may have not been devastating.
In my opinion, Andree has done very well in being able to sustain the hours she does work considering this. She may well have ended up being on full disability, if she wasn't has [sic] motivated to return to work on a full time basis, has [sic] I had anticipate [sic] her symptoms would exacerbate [sic] and force her to go off on a full disability.
75  I take from these comments in the letters to the disability insurers that the plaintiff's tendon injury was particularly damaging to a person in the occupation of a dental hygienist and that the changes to her posture necessitated by substantial limitation on the use of her left hand in a two-handed job, caused her chronic and continuing pain in her neck and back.
76  I also take from these letters that it was the plaintiff's determination to continue working which kept her from claiming total disability and that her doctor believed without that determination she would not have been able to continue working.
77  Dr. Grieve was also asked whether in her view the plaintiff as she aged would have needed help with her garden and housework in any event of the Accident.
78  Her answer was somewhat equivocal. She said the issue had not come up before the Accident and the plaintiff could do shorter hours but still cope with her activities of daily living before the Accident. As well, she stated that even if the plaintiff found such tasks harder as she aged, it is possible she would not have obtained help to do this work anyway.
79  I took these answers as an indication Dr. Grieve did not wish to say that this plaintiff with her chronic neck and back pain and her injured left hand could have found it harder to do heavy household and garden tasks as she grew older even if she had not suffered the soft tissue injuries she did in the Accident. I must say that it seems almost self-evident that the plaintiff would have had decreasing capacity to do heavy work as she aged, given her physical difficulties.
80  I note that Dr. Grieve testified that after the plaintiff returned to work following the injury to her tendons, she settled into a routine of seeing Dr. Grieve about twice a year to have forms filled out for her insurers. Her condition was relatively stable and there was little change from year to year. By 2004, it seemed her chronic neck and back pain was somewhat under control with rest and exercise and the use of massage therapy.
81  After the plaintiff's involvement in a second accident in June 2007 in which she was at fault, Dr. Grieve said that the plaintiff's subjective report was that she did not suffer injury. However, Dr. Grieve was not aware of the extent of the damage to the plaintiff's car and agreed that her vulnerability to injury could have been increased by her pre-existing condition, depending on the mechanics and severity of the impact experienced.
82  As evidence of her conclusion the plaintiff did not suffer injury in this accident, Dr. Grieve and the plaintiff agreed to a trial of longer work hours some three weeks later. This trial was not successful and the plaintiff suffered increased pain and fatigue such that she could not continue with more hours at work.
83  I found Dr. Grieve to be a witness sympathetic to her patient and somewhat inclined to select her evidence according to the forum in which she found herself. In her reports to the insurers, she emphasized the serious effect of the tendon injuries and its secondary consequences and drew a connection between the plaintiff's pre-existing neck and back condition and her neck and back condition after the Accident, but in her report for the Court and her testimony, she was inclined to minimize the plaintiff's pre-existing condition and omit the connection between it and her post-Accident condition.
84  As a result, while I give some weight to Dr. Grieve's opinion, I am not convinced it is without partiality.
B. Heidi Chamberlain, RMT
85  Ms. Chamberlain is a former Registered Nurse who qualified as a Registered Massage Therapist in 1985. She is 68 years old and sees 8 to 10 clients a day and delivers massage as needed.
86  Ms. Chamberlain's report was conceded on objection by defence counsel to have offered opinion beyond her expertise. The report contained medical diagnoses, offered observations which were nothing more than common sense comments, contained argument, relayed the plaintiff's litigation position and advocated in her favour.
87  The trial stood down to allow counsel to discuss problems with her report and to redact objectionable portions. The result was a somewhat disjointed report with some still unacceptable medical opinion which I have not considered in my reasons. Neither have I considered as admissible Ms. Chamberlain's opinions expressed in testimony when she went beyond the limit of her qualifications. For example, she opined that when a patient's response to massage is not good, this may mean the presence of impingement, inflammation or that the patient is in an emotional holding pattern. Not only am I uncertain of what these diagnoses mean, Ms. Chamberlain's training does not permit her to draw these conclusions other than for her own purposes. They are not admissible as evidence.
88  Ms. Chamberlain testified that the plaintiff had seen her 67 times before the Accident with her last pre-Accident visit taking place November 17, 2005, when the plaintiff had strained her back lifting rocks for a retaining wall she was building in her garden.
89  It is clear from her clinical records that the plaintiff sought treatment for her neck, back, shoulder and arms pre-Accident, areas for which she also sought treatment post-Accident.
90  No post-Accident clinical records were produced although Ms. Chamberlain's report makes reference to many visits which took place after the Accident. The plaintiff does not seek to recover the cost of these visits since she would have continued to go for massage in any event of the Accident.
91  Numbered among Ms. Chamberlain's practice are four or five dental hygienists. She commented that she does a lot of work on their shoulder blades and upper backs because they "are overused in their work".
92  I take from this that dental hygienists often suffer neck and back discomfort from the positions they occupy in their work.
93  Ms. Chamberlain opined that stress caused difficulty for the plaintiff and on occasion, only the massage she was undergoing kept her at work. She attempted to emphasize the "maintenance" purpose for the plaintiff coming for massage with the inference I was asked to draw being that the plaintiff did not attend because of her symptoms but because she wanted to keep herself in a condition where she would not develop symptoms. However, it cannot be disputed that Ms. Chamberlain worked on areas of the plaintiff's body where she felt tenderness and stress so that I fail to see the distinction argued for by the plaintiff.
94  The plaintiff found she benefited from her visits to Ms. Chamberlain with less discomfort in her neck, back and shoulder caused by her work.
95  One of the matters raised by the report is that the plaintiff could not tolerate deep massage after the Accident as she had been able to before the Accident. I take from this that the plaintiff's muscles were more painful post-Accident.
96  I understand why Ms. Chamberlain had to be called by the plaintiff, but I did not find her evidence to be of great assistance in this matter.
C. Dr. Keith Christian
97  As noted above, Dr. Christian is an orthopaedic surgeon. He saw the plaintiff on September 16, 2008 with respect to issues arising from the Accident.
98  His opinion reveals that he did not have access to much of the pre-Accident medical history of the plaintiff either by way of clinical records or from the plaintiff herself.
99  Dr. Christian agreed in cross-examination that it is important to have an accurate and detailed history of a patient in order to provide an accurate diagnosis and prognosis.
100  As a result of the lack of pre-Accident history of the patient, I find Dr. Christian's report to be of limited use. It is largely a reiteration of the plaintiff's self-reports without any substantial analysis of the pre-existing injury and its effect or lack thereof on the plaintiff's post-Accident condition.
101  I do not fault Dr. Christian for this omission: the plaintiff was not forthcoming about her pre-Accident medical history. Without it, Dr. Christian could not be expected to do the kind of analysis which would have been of assistance to the Court. As well, he did not recall having seen the plaintiff seven years earlier.
102  With the limited information available to him, Dr. Christian concludes that the lack of resolution to the plaintiff's condition likely indicates that she will not achieve a full asymptomatic recovery. However, with no indication from him that he was able to consider the plaintiff's pre-Accident medical history, the Court has no way of knowing what Dr. Christian considered her pre-Accident condition to be for purposes of estimating her full recovery from the injuries suffered in the Accident.
103  I also find it somewhat puzzling that Dr. Christian opines the following:
The residual symptoms that might be anticipated from this injury would likely include difficulty in being involved in fine work with the hands.
104  Dr. Gropper opined that the plaintiff did not suffer injury to her hands as a result of the Accident and hand trauma is his specialty.
105  As well, it is not disputed that the plaintiff suffered a loss of proprioception in her left hand as a result of the crush injury in 1999. There is no evidence her right hand is affected as a result of that injury or of the Accident.
106  While Dr. Christian does say it is unlikely the plaintiff will be able to return to doing the same level of physical work that she was doing prior to the Accident, he does not "anticipate the necessity for domestic help as a result of this injury".
107  It is Dr. Christian's view that the plaintiff will be able to manage her household work but with "somewhat reduced vigor".
108  I found Dr. Christian's report to be of little assistance.
D. Dr. Duncan Laidlow
109  Dr. Laidlow was retained by the defendant to do an independent medical examination of the plaintiff. He has prepared two reports and one brief letter: October 8, 2008 (report) January 9, 2009, (letter inquiring about availability of additional pre-Accident clinical records), and May 28, 2009 (report).
110  Dr. Laidlow was qualified as an expert in physical medicine and rehabilitation.
111  His medical-legal work is split almost evenly between work for plaintiffs and defendants. This division is carefully maintained by Dr. Laidlow by setting up equal time slots for each side of the bar.
112  Dr. Laidlow indicated in his first report that he would be better equipped to give a considered opinion of the difference in the plaintiff's condition as a result of the injuries she suffered in the Accident if he had a better idea of her pre-Accident condition. To do that he suggested it might be helpful were he able to review records from the physiotherapist and massage therapist attended by the plaintiff prior to the Accident.
113  It appears from his first report that he is concerned the plaintiff may tend to suffer from neck and lower back pain as a result of the secondary effects of her crush injury but without having seen her records, he makes the assumption such pain was infrequent and short-lived.
114  This assumption is based on the relatively sparse historical medical information given to him by the plaintiff that she suffered from "occasional lower back pain" and once had tendonitis in her right shoulder some years ago.
115  The objective signs noted by Dr. Laidlow in his first report were restriction in movement in the neck and lower back, tenderness in the musculature in and around the neck and lower back and tenderness over the bicipital area (front of the shoulder) and shoulder musculature.
116  Dr. Laidlow linked the plaintiff's ongoing mechanical symptoms in the neck, right shoulder area and head to the musculoligamentous injury she sustained in the Accident and also found the same kind of injury to the lower back resulting in ongoing mechanical pain there.
117  He found as well that the Accident had caused an additional level of disability to the plaintiff on top of the problems caused by the adaptations to body postures necessitated by her hand injury.
118  However, the above findings were predicated on the relatively restricted access Dr. Laidlow had had to the plaintiff's clinical records which did not include records of Dr. Grieve before 2004, and did not include Ms. Chamberlain's notes or those of Lisa Crockett, a physiotherapist consulted by the plaintiff regarding neck and back issues caused by adaptive body postures related to her hand injury.
119  By the time of Dr. Laidlow's next report, dated May 29, 2009, he had reviewed the clinical records of Lisa Crockett, physiotherapist, dated December 28, 2000 to January 25, 2001 and the earlier records of Dr. Grieve, dated January 1, 2001 to June 5, 2005. By then, he had also reviewed some post-Accident physiotherapy records and the notes of Ms. Chamberlain.
120  It is clear that Dr. Laidlow was the only expert who had the opportunity to make a comprehensive review of the clinical records of the plaintiff from the time of her hand injury through to and after the Accident.
121  Dr. Laidlow states in his report of May 28, 2009, that he had asked the plaintiff about her previous health status, presumably in the independent medical examination on September 26, 2008. As indicated above, she told him she had had occasional lower back pain for which she consulted a physiotherapist and she saw Heidi Chamberlain, a massage therapist, for preventive care.
122  Although Dr. Laidlow insisted on calling Ms. Chamberlain's diagrams of treatment areas on the plaintiff's body, "pain diagrams", I am not sure much turns on this. Ms. Chamberlain indicated in her testimony that the diagrams showed areas on the body where she had done massage on the plaintiff. It appears reasonable to assume Ms. Chamberlain would treat areas which were bothering the plaintiff or which Ms. Chamberlain believed were sources of discomfort.
123  In his report, Dr. Laidlow does not acknowledge that the plaintiff did not see her doctor for almost two years before the Accident. In cross-examination, he said that the plaintiff found other modalities for treatment such as massage. He points to consistent use of these modalities through to 2005 for arms, neck and mid and lower back issues. He does note that the massage treatment closest in time to the Accident related to the plaintiff hauling rocks with resulting neck and back issues.
124  However, the biggest departure in his report relates to his analysis of the plaintiff's previous medical history. He finds that she was prone to neck, mid-back and lower back pain leading up to the Accident.
125  Dr. Laidlow confirms his initial finding that the Accident caused "musculoligamentous strain to the neck and upper shoulder area" but that this strain amounted to an aggravation of the plaintiff's pre-existing issues with the same areas and the pain she suffered. His finding with respect to the lower back is the same but adds that the Accident caused musculoligamentous injury superimposed on the pre-existing mechanical lower back pain.
126  The conclusion to which Dr. Laidlow comes, based on his review of the records combined with his initial examination, is that the plaintiff would likely have had to cut back her hours of work in any event of the Accident due to the steps she was having to take to manage her symptoms pre-Accident. However, he qualifies this finding by saying that the Accident accelerated this process and aggravated her pre-existing condition. The same rationale would apply to her ability to do yard work and heavy housekeeping tasks - that she would have had to cut back even had the Accident not occurred but the injuries caused by the Accident put this process forward.
127  I found Dr. Laidlow on cross-examination to be somewhat rigid in his opinions even when he had reasonable responses to points put to him by plaintiff's counsel. However, it remains the fact that he alone looked at all the clinical records to come to his conclusions. He was able to use Ms. Chamberlain's records and to analyse her notes of "not good" and "not too good" in relation to some acute areas of treatment to determine that the plaintiff was suffering from active neck, shoulder and arm problems in the years leading up to the Accident.
128  Defence counsel points out in his submissions that Dr. Grieve's Attending Physician Statements prepared for the plaintiff's disability insurers were not put to Dr. Laidlow in cross-examination because they also revealed "a picture of ongoing and consistent neck and back pain over the six-year time frame between the Left Hand injury and the Accident."
129  I will note some of these Attending Physician Statements made by Dr. Grieve. I have arbitrarily chosen to begin with a letter prepared by Dr. Grieve in 2001:
November 27, 2001 (Dr. Grieve to Maritime Life): "It's actually surprising she has not been completely debilitated from her occupation and that she can work on a part-time basis."
December 18, 2002 (Manulife Physician Statement prepared by Dr. Grieve): Primary Diagnosis: As previous - tendon damage to fingers. Secondary Diagnosis: Back pain due to positioning/posturing. Prognosis: Very motivated has plateaued with respect to recovery.
February 23, 2003 (Canada Life Physician Statement prepared by Dr. Grieve): - Primary Damage L 3rd and 4th digits. Additional Conditions: Back pain due to position change required to continue working. Nature of treatment: No new tmt instituted. Chronic Condition. Prognosis: has made maximum recovery.
February 26, 2004 (Maritime Physician Statement prepared by Dr. Grieve): Primary Diagnosis: As previous - tendon damage to fingers. Secondary diagnosis: Back pain due to positioning/posturing. Prognosis: plateaued.
June 3, 2005 (Maritime Physician Statement prepared by Dr. Grieve) - Primary Diagnosis: As previous - tendon damage to fingers. She is working 2 days per week. This is maximum she can do. This amount causes fatigue and pain and requires additional days to recover so can work the 2 days/wk. the following wk. Prognosis: plateaued. Do not anticipate further recovery.
June 5, 2002 (Canada Life Physician Statement prepared by Dr. Grieve) - Her progress/symptoms have plateaued. I do not anticipate any further improvement. I do not anticipate she will be able to increase the number of hours working.
May 9, 2006 - 6 months post-Accident (Manulife Physician Statement) - Patient is still unable to return to work. Prior to the accident she was very limited due to the injury in her L hand as gets pain in hand and muscle spasm in back and neck despite working part time (on disability). Therefore with the STI from MVA, recovery time is increased.
October 3, 2006 (Letter from Dr. Grieve) - "Andree continues to have significant syptomatology in her neck with associated headache. This is exacerbated by her pre-existing claim or injury. As you know, she has decreased mobility in the fingers of her left hand due to a tendon injury. This in itself caused her to be fatigued and have back pain. She was only able to work part-time."
ANALYSIS
130  The central issue in this personal injury case is to assess the extent and effect of the plaintiff's injuries caused by the Accident.
131  In the assessment of damages, whether she had a pre-existing injury is key.
132  I do not think it can be disputed that the plaintiff had coped very well with her tendon injury. As well, I think it is clear she is a hard-working and determined person who could have simply given up her job based on that severe injury to her hand.
133  But it cannot also be said that she did not have a pre-existing condition. In my view, Dr. Laidlow puts it well when he says that the injuries caused by the Accident were superimposed upon the pre-existing neck, back and shoulder mechanical pain. The chronic nature of that mechanical pain is clear from Dr. Grieve's reports to the various long term disability insurers and is part of the hand injury the plaintiff suffered in 1999.
134  The pre-existing neck, back and shoulder problems were no doubt also related to the awkward and tiring positions required to be held by the plaintiff doing her job of dental hygiene. The evidence from the lay witnesses, including the plaintiff's daughter, a dental assistant, indicated that some dental hygienists use massage therapy regularly to deal with the muscle tension in their necks and backs caused by their jobs.
135  I did not have evidence from a functional capacity evaluator, but it does seem to be a common sense proposition that a job like dental hygiene which takes a toll on the neck, back and shoulders would present continuing difficulty for a person who has already developed chronic symptoms in those parts of her body.
136  When a musculoligamentous strain is added to those conditions, it is not surprising that recovery from that strain is delayed and complicated.
137  I accept Dr. Laidlow's findings with respect to the plaintiff's pre-existing condition and will consider its effect on damages in due course.
138  I will say that I find it unlikely the plaintiff's current state of health and her problems can be attributed more than partially to the Accident.
DAMAGES
A. Non-pecuniary damages:
139  In considering damages, one must first consider causation.
140  It is now well-accepted law that the statement of the legal test for causation is that set out in the case of Resurfice Corp. v. Hanke, ,  at paras. 21-23:
[21] First, the basic test for determining causation remains the "but for" test. This applies to multi-cause injuries. The plaintiff bears the burden of showing that "but for" the negligent act or omission of each defendant, the injury would not have occurred. Having done this, contributory negligence may be apportioned, as permitted by statute.
[22] This fundamental rule has never been displaced and remains the primary test for causation in negligence actions. As stated in Athey v. Leonati, at para. 14 per Major, J., "[t]he general, but not conclusive, test for causation is the "but for" test, which requires the plaintiff to show that the injury would not have occurred but for the negligence of the defendant". Similarly as I noted in Blackwater v. Plint, , at para. 78, "[t]he rules of causation consider generally whether 'but for' the defendant's acts, the plaintiff's damages would have been incurred on a balance of probabilities."
[23] The "but for" test recognizes that compensation for negligent conduct should only be made "where a substantial connection between the injury and the defendant's conduct" is present. It ensures that a defendant will not be held liable for the plaintiff's injuries where they "may very well be due to factors unconnected to the defendant and not the fault of anyone": Snell v. Farrell, , at p. 327, per Sopinka, J.
141  The purpose of non-pecuniary damage awards is to compensate the plaintiff for "pain, suffering, loss of enjoyment of life and loss of amenities": Jackson v. Lai,  at para. 134; see also Andrews v. Grand & Toy Alberta Ltd., , ; and Kuskis v. Hon Tin,  ["Kuskis"]. While each award must be made with reference to the particular circumstances and facts of the case, other cases may serve as a guide to assist the Court in arriving at an award that is just and fair to both parties: Kuskis, at para. 136.
142  The plaintiff submits that the appropriate range of damages for non-pecuniary loss in this case should be in the range of <damage type = "other">$60,000</damage> to <damage type = "other">$70,000</damage> based on the following cases: Gold v. Joe, ; Clark v. Stricker, ; Jopling v. Brodowich, ; Antoniali v. Massey, ; and Suzuki v. Bain, .
143  The defendant submits that the case law supports non-pecuniary damages being awarded in the amount of <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage>: Corrado v. Mah,  ["Corrado"]; and Naidu v. Mann, . It is the defendant's position that the <damage type = "other">$50,000</damage> should be reduced by 50% to take into account the plaintiff's original position.
144  There are a number of factors that courts must take into account when assessing this type of claim. Madam Justice Kirkpatrick, writing for the majority, in Stapley v. Hejslet, , , outlines the factors to consider, at para. 46:
[46] The inexhaustive list of common factors cited in Boyd [Boyd v. Harris, ] that influence an award of non-pecuniary damages includes:
age of the plaintiff;
nature of the injury;
severity and duration of pain;
disability;
emotional suffering; and
loss or impairment of life;
I would add the following factors, although they may arguably be subsumed in the above list:
impairment of family, marital and social relationships;
impairment of physical and mental abilities;
loss of lifestyle; and
the plaintiff's stoicism (as a factor that should not, generally speaking, penalize the plaintiff: Giang v. Clayton, , ).
145  In the circumstances of this case, I must also consider the plaintiff's history of a pre-existing condition. I say this notwithstanding the requirement that the defendant must take the plaintiff as she finds her.
146  The role that damages plays is to place the plaintiff, as much as possible, in her original position. It is not the obligation of the defendant to put the plaintiff in a better condition than she was in. As noted in Athey v. Leonati,  at para. 35, , per Mr. Justice Major:
[35] ... The defendant is liable for the injuries caused, even if they are extreme, but need not compensate the plaintiff for any debilitating effects of the pre-existing condition which the plaintiff would have experienced anyway. The defendant is liable for the additional damage but not for the pre-existing damage. ... Likewise, if there is a measurable risk that the pre-existing condition would have detrimentally affected the plaintiff in the future, regardless of the defendant's negligence, then this can be taken into account in reducing the overall award. ... This is consistent with the general rule that the plaintiff must be returned to the position he would have been in, with all of its attendant risks and shortcomings, and not a better position.
147  Also, as noted by the Court of Appeal in T.W.N.A. v. Canada (Ministry of Indian Affairs),  at para. 28, :
[28] ... a pre-existing condition, whether it is quiescent or active, is part of the plaintiff's original position.
148  The Court goes on, at para. 48, to say:
[48] ... Whether manifest or not, a weakness inherent in a plaintiff that might realistically cause or contribute to the loss claimed regardless of the tort is relevant to the assessment of damages. It is a contingency that should be accounted for in the award. Moreover, such a contingency does not have to be proven to a certainty. Rather, it should be given weight according to its relative likelihood.
149  First, can we say in this case that "but for" the negligence of the defendant, the plaintiff's damages would have been incurred?
150  Causation is established because the defendant's negligent act resulted in an exacerbation of the plaintiff's pre-existing condition through the injuries she suffered when the defendant's car came through the red light and collided with the plaintiff's car.
151  The assessment of her damages must take into account the fact that the injuries she did suffer were "superimposed upon the pre-existing mechanical pain" caused by the postural changes the plaintiff had been forced to use to adapt to her left hand injury in 1999, and exacerbated by the wear and tear caused by the positions she must use in her job over the years since 2000, her return to work from the hand injury.
152  The plaintiff was 57 years old at the time of the Accident. Her age is relevant to the fact that it may have extended the time she took to heal. She did not have the "resilience of youth".
153  The plaintiff suffered pain at the scene of the Accident. She was not admitted to hospital but was sent home with painkillers. She missed six months of work in a job she loves and for which she had sacrificed considerably in returning to work from her severe hand injury in 2000.
154  After the Accident, the plaintiff could not get out of her car. She had to be extracted with the use of the Jaws of Life by emergency personnel. This was frightening to say the least and no doubt contributed to a period when she was a very nervous driver. This did not endure indefinitely because the plaintiff made herself carry on with her life. She also wisely sought help from a psychologist to deal with her trauma.
155  The plaintiff has suffered serious pain in her neck, back and shoulder and initially also had pain in her elbow and right knee. Both the knee and elbow resolved within six months of the Accident although there remains some soreness in her knee.
156  The inability of the plaintiff to maintain her house and garden to the level she had before the Accident has caused her emotional distress. Her daughters both testified that before the Accident she had been an exacting housekeeper and her garden was beautiful. She is now simply unable to carry on at that level.
157  There is no doubt the plaintiff has suffered a loss of lifestyle. She is able to work only two half days a week, Wednesdays and Fridays, where before the Accident she worked two full days. She has concerns about the security of her employment since her work space is now empty for two half days a week and her employer could earn more money if that room were occupied for two full days as before.
158  There is little evidence about her recreational activities pre-Accident except for gardening and that she tried to use a kayak post-Accident and found it caused her pain.
159  It appears unlikely that the plaintiff will ever be free of symptoms in her neck, back and shoulder.
160  However, it is my view that there is a measurable risk that the plaintiff's pre-existing condition would have detrimentally affected her in the future in any event of the Accident. This is not a risk which can be proven but based on the chronic nature of her condition pre-Accident, there is a high probability she would have continued to suffer symptoms in her neck, back and shoulder and as she aged, to have had to cut back on her lifestyle and her work.
161  As noted in Corrado, at para. 54, there is difficulty in applying the crumbling skull rule to a situation such as this where there is a chance, but not a certainty that the plaintiff would have suffered the harm but for the defendant's conduct.
162  In this case, the plaintiff's difficulties were accelerated and aggravated by the Accident but would likely have interfered with her work and her lifestyle in any event of the Accident.
163  As a result, although the injuries the plaintiff suffered in the Accident are not the sole cause of her current condition, she did incur soft tissue injuries which continue to cause her suffering and which are somewhat disabling but which are connected with the pre-existing condition inherent in her original position. This must be considered in the assessment of both non-pecuniary damages and damages for loss of earning capacity.
164  I have considered all of these factors in determining that I would award the sum of <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$60,000</damage> to the plaintiff for non-pecuniary damages and discount it by 25% taking into account the plaintiff's original position, for a total of <damage type = "reduction to">$45,000</damage>.
B. Past Wage Loss
165  The plaintiff was off work for approximately six months following the Accident.
166  She was working two seven-hour days before the Accident and her wage loss is agreed to be <damage type = "past wage loss">$63,684.08</damage> to the date of trial on the assumption she would have continued to work 14 hours per week instead of the nine hours to which she was reduced by reason of her injuries.
167  I am aware that the defendant has argued that the plaintiff should only be awarded her past wage loss on a make-whole basis up to the date of her second accident in June 2007 and then only 50% thereafter on the basis that but for the second accident, it is more probable the plaintiff could have increased her hours of work to a schedule resembling her pre-Accident schedule.
168  There is some appeal to this argument but there is simply no evidence before me to support such a proposition. While I am somewhat sceptical that the plaintiff suffered no ill effects from the June 2007 accident in which she was at fault, I do not believe her doctor would have ignored any objective signs of injury to encourage the plaintiff to increase her hours of work. It may be this action was designed to do away with any negative effect on the plaintiff's claim but I am unable to make this finding.
169  Therefore, I find it to be a reasonable assumption that the plaintiff would have continued to work 14 hours per week up to the trial date and was unable to do so as a result of the Accident. I award <damage type = "past wage loss">$63,684.08</damage> on the understanding that counsel will be able to agree on the net wage loss figure after deduction for income tax. If they are unable to agree, they may make an application before me.
C. Loss of future earning capacity
170  In Hooper v. Nair, , I set out the elements to be proved to demonstrate a loss of future earning capacity as follows, at paras. 119-125:
[119] In order to be successful under this head of damages, the plaintiff must prove a substantial possibility of future income loss: see Parypa v. Wickware, , ; Steenblok v. Funk ,  (C.A.); Steward v. Berezan, , .
[120] The purpose of this damage award is to compensate the party for the loss of earning capacity as a capital asset, not to compensate for the lost earnings themselves: see Palmer v. Goodall  at 59,  (C.A.); Parypa at para. 63.
[121] In considering this claim, a court must determine the extent of the future loss of income-earning capacity by taking into account all substantial possibilities and assessing the likelihood of their occurrence, based on the evidence: Parypa at para. 67; Steward at para. 17.
[122] There are, of course, inherent difficulties in assessing such damages which were recognized by Justice Dickson (as he then was) in Andrews, where he stated at 251:
We must now gaze more deeply into the crystal ball. What sort of career would the accident victim have had? What were his prospects and potential prior to the accident? It is not loss of earnings, but, rather, loss of earning capacity for which compensation must be made: A capital asset has been lost: what was its value?
[123] To assist in this assessment, there are four considerations which are often cited in determining the value of the loss and are set out in the decision of Brown v. Golaiy ,  at para. 8 (S.C.):
The plaintiff has been rendered less capable overall from earning income from all types of employment;
The plaintiff is less marketable or attractive as an employee to potential employers;
The plaintiff has lost the ability to take advantage of all job opportunities which might otherwise have been open to him, had he not been injured; and
The plaintiff is less valuable to himself as a person capable of earning income in a competitive labour market.
[124] While a first step in this determination may involve some element of mathematical calculation, "the law is clear that in these cases the task of the court is to assess damages, not to calculate them on some mathematical formula": Mulholland (Guardian ad litem of) v. Riley Estate ,  at para. 43 (C.A.).
[125] A court must consider all of the evidence that is reasonable in the circumstances in assessing such an award; reference to projections, calculations and formula may be useful insofar as determining what is "fair and reasonable": Parypa at para. 70. It is important for courts to "look at all relevant factors, especially general incapacity, before fixing an amount": Morris v. Rose Estate ,  at para. 24. A court should also be guided, to some extent, by the claimant's actual earnings prior to the accident: Smith v. Knudsen, ,  at para. 34.
171  The British Columbia Court of Appeal has recently restated the principles a court must consider in determining awards for loss of future earning capacity in Perren v. Lalari, . Madam Justice Garson, speaking for a unanimous Court, made the following comments at para. 32:
[32] A plaintiff must always prove, as was noted by Donald J.A. in Steward, by Bauman J. in Chang, , and by Tysoe J.A. in Romanchych, , that there is a real and substantial possibility of a future event leading to an income loss.
172  As noted in Steward v. Berezan, ,  at para. 17:
[17] ... The claimant bears the onus to prove at trial a substantial possibility of a future event leading to an income loss, and the court must then award compensation on an estimation of the chance that the event will occur: [Parypa v. Wickware, , ], at para. 65.
173  The plaintiff argues that she has demonstrated a commitment to her job such that she would continue working to age 70. She points out that except for a small amount of Canada Pension income she will receive from her ex-husband's pension and her own Canada Pension payment, she does not have an employment pension. She says that it is her desire to continue on in a job she enjoys and there is some economic impetus to encourage this.
174  If that were the case, and the plaintiff proved to be unable to work longer hours than she is currently doing, then her loss would be substantial over the eight years or so she has said she would have remained in her job.
175  However, there are many contingencies to consider including the impact of the plaintiff's pre-existing condition on her ability to continue to work to age 70.
176  While I am aware of Ms. Freeman's evidence that it is "not uncommon" for dental hygienists to work past 65 and she knows of one who recently retired at age 68, I am also aware of the evidence that it is very common for dental hygienists to have continuing problems with their necks, shoulders and backs because they are overused in their work, and I find that such problems would be even greater for the plaintiff with her history.
177  It is my view that the plaintiff would have worked to age 65 had the Accident not happened. In coming to this finding, I have considered her pre-existing history and its likely effect on her stamina which would not be helped over time.
178  I have also considered the factors set out in Golaiy as follows: the plaintiff is rendered less capable overall from earning income from all types of employment. Certainly, at this point in her life it would not be probable she could retrain for other employment at which she could earn a similar amount and at which she would be capable of working.
179  Hiring a person known to have difficulty with and propensity for problems with her neck, back and shoulders is a risky decision for an employer and one which an employer is unlikely to make. Hence, the plaintiff is less marketable to potential employers.
180  The plaintiff is less valuable to herself in that she has lost the confidence she had when she was able to return to work and relearn her job to a standard of performance which merited her assessment as an excellent hygienist by her fellow employee. She is now reduced to a very part-time employee.
181  However, the part played by her pre-existing condition must come into consideration in determining her loss of future earning capacity. It is a substantial contingency which could have affected her ability to continue working.
182  It is possible that the injury to the plaintiff's left hand coupled with the aging process would have resulted in further loss of proprioception so that she would no longer be able to perform as a dental hygienist. It is indeed fortunate that Dr. Christian's gloomy prognosis in 2001 was not fulfilled by the plaintiff's complete debilitation but the seriousness of her hand injury was what led him to come to that prognosis.
183  The assessment of lost earning capacity is not a mathematical calculation but is an assessment based on the many considerations set out in the case law.
184  I estimate that the plaintiff would have continued to work for another three years from the date of trial. Her loss of hours, if she continues to work for two half days, results in a loss of approximately <damage type = "other">$12,700</damage> per year (gross). Over the three years I estimate she would continue working, this amounts to <damage type = "future wage loss">$38,100</damage>.
185  I will deduct from that an amount of 25% for the measurable risk that her pre-existing condition would have resulted in her early retirement for a total award of <damage type = "reduction to">$28, 575</damage>. I have also figured into this assessment the possibility that she will be able to increase her hours of work somewhat in the next three years.
186  I will leave it to counsel to deal with the necessary income tax deduction calculations.
D. Cost of future care
187  The medical evidence regarding the need for future care is not supportive of the plaintiff's position that she should receive an award of <damage type = "other">$20,000</damage>.
188  Dr. Christian states she does not require domestic help but can carry on her former tasks although with less vigour.
189  Dr. Laidlow believes she should undertake a substantial exercise programme to improve her flexibility.
190  I will award the plaintiff <damage type = "sub-future care">$1,000</damage> for the cost of 10 sessions with a personal trainer to help develop an exercise programme tailored to her particular needs.
191  In addition, I will award her <damage type = "sub-future care">$800</damage> for the cost of pruning and heavy gardening over the next few years. Were it not for the plaintiff's pre-existing condition, I would have awarded the sum of <damage type = "other">$1,200</damage>.
E. Special Damages
192  The plaintiff claims the amount of <damage type = "other">$7,939.08</damage> as special damages.
193  The defendant argues that any amount incurred past June 2007 when the plaintiff's Accident injuries had plateaued and in the defendant's view, resolved, and the plaintiff was involved in the second accident, should not be awarded as the costs of housekeeping and yard work claimed for should reasonably be attributed to the plaintiff's pre-existing condition and the second accident.
194  However, I am again faced with a lack of evidence on the effect of the second accident.
195  The defendant puts forward a figure of <damage type = "other">$4,851.98</damage>.
196  In keeping with my analysis under non-pecuniary damages and damages for lost earning capacity, I will begin with the plaintiff's figure rounded off to <damage type = "special">$7,900.00</damage> and deduct 25% or <damage type = "reduction by">$1,975</damage> as recognition that some of these costs would be related to the plaintiff's pre-existing condition for a total award of <damage type = "special">$5,925.00</damage>.
SUMMARY
197  I award the plaintiff the following damages:
 Non-pecuniary damages: <damage type = "non-pecuniary">$45,000.00</damage> 
 Past wage loss: <damage type = "past wage loss">$63,684.08</damage> 
 Loss of future earning <damage type = "future wage loss">$28,575.00</damage> 
 capacity:  
 Cost of future care: <damage type = "future care">$1,800.00</damage> 
 Special damages: <damage type = "special">$5,925.00</damage> 
 Total: <damage type = "total">$144,984.08</damage> 
plus interest under the Court Order Interest Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, c. 79.
198  The plaintiff will have her costs subject to any offers made which, if necessary, can be dealt with before me as well as any issues of deduction, including no fault benefits and net income calculations.
L.D. RUSSELL J.
* * * * *
Correction
Released: May 31, 2010
Please be advised that the attached Reasons for Judgment of Madam Justice Russell dated May 28, 2010 have been edited. as follows
On the first page of the Reasons, the spelling of counsel for the plaintiff's name has been corrected from M.L. Porohecky to M.L. Pohorecky.
End of Document